Title: Robust Semi-Supervised Temporal Intrusion Detection for Adversarial Cloud Networks

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.12655v1

Published Time: Wed, 15 Apr 2026 01:03:54 GMT

Number of Pages: 8

Markdown Content:
# Robust Semi-Supervised Temporal Intrusion Detection for Adversarial Cloud Networks 

Anasuya Chattopadhyay 

German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), Germany Email: anasuya.chattopadhyay@dfki.de 

Daniel Reti 

German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), Germany Email: daniel.reti@dfki.de 

Hans D. Schotten 

German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), and RPTU University Kaiserslautern-Landau, Germany E-mail: schotten@eit.uni-kl.de 

©2026 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, collecting new collected works for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works. 

Abstract —Cloud networks increasingly rely on machine learn-ing based Network Intrusion Detection Systems to defend against evolving cyber threats. However, real-world deployments are challenged by limited labeled data, non-stationary traffic, and adaptive adversaries. While semi-supervised learning can allevi-ate label scarcity, most existing approaches implicitly assume benign and stationary unlabeled traffic, leading to degraded performance in adversarial cloud environments. This paper proposes a robust semi-supervised temporal learning framework for cloud intrusion detection that explicitly addresses adversarial contamination and temporal drift in unlabeled network traffic. Operating on flow-level data, this framework combines super-vised learning with consistency regularization, confidence-aware pseudo-labeling, and selective temporal invariance to conser-vatively exploit unlabeled traffic while suppressing unreliable samples. By leveraging the temporal structure of network flows, the proposed method improves robustness and generalization across heterogeneous cloud environments. Extensive evaluations on publicly available datasets (CIC-IDS2017, CSE-CIC-IDS2018, and UNSW-NB15) under limited-label conditions demonstrate that the proposed framework consistently outperforms state-of-the-art supervised and semi-supervised network intrusion detection systems in detection performance, label efficiency, and resilience to adversarial and non-stationary traffic. 

Index Terms —Network intrusion detection systems, Cloud computing security, Semi-supervised learning, Adversarial ma-chine learning, Network security, Deep learning 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

A. Background & Motivation 

Cloud computing has become a core component of modern digital infrastructure, supporting critical services across enter-prise, industrial, and public sectors. The scale, elasticity, and heterogeneity of cloud environments generate large volumes of high-dimensional network traffic, rendering traditional signature-based security mechanisms increasingly ineffective [1]. As a result, machine learning (ML)–based Network Intrusion Detection Systems (NIDS) have emerged as a central element of cloud security architectures, enabling automated detection of malicious activity from network traffic patterns [2]. Despite their promise, ML-driven NIDS face significant challenges in real-world cloud deployments [3]. High quality labeled attack data is scarce due to the cost of manual annotation, privacy constraints, and the continuous emergence of novel threats. Moreover, cloud network traffic is inherently non-stationary, meaning they have variable scaling, workload dynamics, and contain evolving user behavior, which induce persistent changes in traffic distributions. These challenges are compounded by adaptive adversaries who deliberately modify their behavior to evade learning-based detection systems. 

B. Limitations of Existing Network Intrusion Detection Ap-proaches 

Early learning-based NIDS relied on supervised learning, achieving strong performance on benchmark datasets but limited generalization in real-world deployments [4]. These approaches assume the availability of comprehensive labeled data, which is rarely feasible. To address this, recent work has explored unsupervised and semi-supervised learning (SSL) methods that leverage large volumes of unlabeled traffic [5]. However, most semi-supervised NIDS assume unlabeled data is predominantly benign. In cloud environments, this assumption often fails, as unlabeled traffic may contain unknown attacks, low-and-slow exfiltration, or adversarially crafted flows that corrupt learning. As a result, such mod-els are prone to performance degradation, false negatives, and concept drift [2]. Concurrently, advances in adversarial artificial intelligence (AI) show that attackers can exploit ML-based defenses by mimicking benign patterns or manipulating unlabeled data, raising concerns about the robustness of AI-driven NIDS [6]. 

C. Research Gap and Key Insight 

While SSL offers a promising approach under label scarcity, existing methods largely overlook the adversarial and non-stationary nature of cloud network traffic [7]. In particular, current semi-supervised NIDS lack mechanisms to (i) suppress malicious samples in unlabeled data, (ii) remain robust under temporal and distributional drift, and (iii) generalize across heterogeneous cloud environments. Our key insight is that cloud traffic exhibits strong temporal structure that can be exploited even with limited labels. Benign traffic tends to be temporally stable, whereas ma-licious activity introduces subtle but meaningful temporal inconsistencies over time. By explicitly leveraging temporal 

> arXiv:2604.12655v1 [cs.LG] 14 Apr 2026

agreement and incorporating robustness-aware objectives, un-labeled data can be utilized effectively while limiting adver-sarial contamination. 

D. Paper Contributions 

To address these challenges, this paper makes the following contributions: 1) Problem Formulation: We formalize the problem of robust semi-supervised network intrusion detection in cloud environments, explicitly accounting for label scarcity, adversarial contamination, and non-stationary traffic distributions. 2) Methodology: We propose RSST-NIDS , a robust semi-supervised temporal intrusion detection framework that combines supervised learning with consistency regu-larization, confidence-aware pseudo-labeling, and se-lectively applied temporal invariance to mitigate the influence of malicious unlabeled data. 3) Evaluation: We conduct a comprehensive evaluation on publicly available, real-world network traffic datasets under limited label and cross-dataset settings, demon-strating improved detection performance, robustness to distribution shift, and label efficiency compared to state-of-the-art approaches. 4) Security Implications: We analyze the implications of deploying semi-supervised learning in adversarial cloud environments and show how robustness-aware temporal learning can strengthen AI-based network defenses. II. R ELATED WORK 

A. Network Intrusion Detection in Cloud Environments 

The deployment of NIDS in cloud environments introduces challenges beyond traditional networks, including large-scale heterogeneity, elastic workloads, and evolving threat surfaces. Domain-invariant approaches such as DI-NIDS [8] address this by learning features invariant across domains via ad-versarial training, achieving strong performance when target-domain data is available. However, this assumption is often unrealistic in cloud set-tings, where future traffic domains and labels are unavailable. Moreover, enforcing domain invariance may suppress cues indicative of emerging or stealthy attacks. In contrast, we address a complementary setting focused on domain-agnostic robustness under label scarcity and adversarial contamination, without requiring target-domain access. Instead of explicit domain alignment, we leverage temporal self-consistency and conservative use of unlabeled data to improve generalization across heterogeneous environments. 

B. Deep Learning for Network Traffic Analysis 

Deep learning has become the dominant paradigm for network traffic analysis, enabling automated feature learning from flow-level data. Convolutional neural networks (CNNs) capture spatial correlations [9], while recurrent neural net-works (RNNs) and long short-term memory (LSTM) model temporal dependencies [10]. More recently, Transformer-based models have improved the modeling of long-range temporal structure [11]. However, most deep learning–based NIDS are trained in fully supervised settings and evaluated within static datasets. As a result, performance degrades under distribution shift, temporal drift, and class imbalance typical of real cloud traf-fic. Moreover, reliance on curated datasets with clean labels limits their applicability in adversarial and non-stationary environments, motivating approaches that leverage unlabeled data while maintaining robustness. 

C. Unsupervised and Semi-Supervised Learning for NIDS 

Unsupervised methods typically model normal traffic and detect anomalies via deviation, with autoencoders widely used for reconstruction-based detection. While reducing reliance on labels, these approaches often suffer from high false positives and difficulty distinguishing benign anomalies from attacks [12]. Semi-supervised methods address this by combining lim-ited labeled data with large unlabeled sets. Approaches such as AnomalyAID [13] use reconstruction-based pseudo-label verification to filter noisy samples, but may be less sensitive to temporally evolving attacks. Similarly, SS-VTCN [14] inte-grates generative temporal reconstruction with discriminative learning, capturing short-term dependencies but potentially enforcing invariance on slowly evolving attacks. In contrast, our approach selectively applies temporal in-variance only to benign-consistent windows, avoiding global reconstruction constraints and reducing the risk of suppressing attack-specific temporal patterns. 

D. Adversarial Machine Learning in Network Security 

The vulnerability of machine learning models to adversarial manipulation has been extensively studied in other domains. However, its implications for network intrusion detection remain less explored. Existing adversarial defense techniques often assume fully labeled datasets or rely on adversarial training strategies that are difficult to apply in semi-supervised settings. Moreover, many defenses focus on static feature per-turbations rather than adaptive, temporally structured attacks commonly observed in network traffic [15]. In contrast to prior work, this paper explicitly considers the interaction between adversarial behavior, unlabeled data contamination, and temporal drift in cloud network intrusion detection. Rather than assuming benign unlabeled traffic, we adopt confidence-aware and temporality-driven learning objectives that conservatively exploit unlabeled data while suppressing the influence of uncertain or malicious samples. By leveraging temporal consistency as a robustness signal and constraining invariance enforcement to benign-consistent windows, the proposed framework addresses key limitations of existing semi-supervised and adversarially robust NIDS. To the best of our knowledge, this work represents one of the first systematic investigations of robust semi-supervised learning for cloud network intrusion detection under realistic, adversarial conditions using publicly available traffic datasets. The proposed approach complements existing deep learning based NIDS by providing a security-aware framework that challenges that are suitable to practical cloud deployments and explicitly accounts for label scarcity, temporal non-stationarity, and adversarial contamination. III. M ETHODOLOGY 

A. Problem Setting and Objective 

We consider a cloud network intrusion detection scenario in which traffic is observed as a continuous stream of flow-level measurements. Let X = {xt}Nt=1 denote a sequence of traffic windows, where each sample xt ∈ RF ×T represents 

F flow-level features aggregated over a temporal window of length T .We adopt a semi-supervised learning setting comprising a small labeled subset XL = {(xi, y i)}NL 

> i=1

with labels yi ∈{0, 1} (benign or malicious), and a large unlabeled subset 

XU = {xj }NU

> j=1

, where NU ≫ NL. Importantly, XU may contain unknown or adversarial traffic, and the underlying data distribution is non-stationary due to workload variation and attacker adaptation. The objective is to learn a detection function: 

fθ : RF ×T → [0 , 1] ,

which predicts the probability of malicious activity while (i) exploiting unlabeled data efficiently, (ii) remaining robust to adversarial contamination, and (iii) maintaining stable performance under temporal drift. 

B. Threat Model and Design Assumptions 

We adopt a black-box adversarial threat model consis-tent with practical cloud network settings. The adversary has no access to model parameters or gradients, but can manipulate network traffic subject to protocol and feature validity constraints. Two attack capabilities are considered. 

Poisoning attacks inject malicious flows into the unlabeled training stream at contamination rates of 5-15%, crafting samples that resemble benign traffic in basic statistics while preserving attack semantics. Evasion attacks are generated via constrained feature blending followed by projection onto the valid problem space: features are clipped and normalized to satisfy NetFlow constraints (e.g., non-negativity, bounded rates, and consistency between packet counts and byte vol-umes), and invalid samples are discarded. White-box attacks are out of scope, as they are less realistic at the network level. While an adaptive adversary could attempt to craft high confidence, slowly evolving malicious traffic, RSST-NIDS does not claim worst case robustness; instead, it aims to raise the cost of evasion by requiring sustained temporal stability and student-teacher agreement under realistic constraints. 

C. Traffic Representation and Temporal Modeling 

To ensure scalability and privacy preservation, the pro-posed framework operates exclusively on flow-level features, including packet and byte counts, flow duration, inter-arrival time statistics, and header-level entropy measures. Flows are aggregated into sliding temporal windows 

xt = {ft−T +1 , . . . , f t},

which enables modeling of burst-based attacks, low-and-slow intrusions, and periodic malicious behavior commonly observed in cloud environments. Temporal dependencies are captured using a Transformer-based encoder that produces a latent representation zt for each window. Transformers are selected for their ability to model long range temporal dependencies. However, the proposed learning framework is architecture-agnostic and can be instantiated with lighter temporal encoders (e.g., TCNs or LSTMs) when computational constraints dominate. 

D. Robust Semi-Supervised Learning Framework 

RSST-NIDS combines supervised learning on labeled data with conservative semi-supervised learning on unlabeled traf-fic. The core design principle is to exploit unlabeled data only when there is sufficient evidence of reliability, thereby limiting the impact of adversarial contamination and noisy pseudo-labels. Training integrates four complementary components: super-vised loss on labeled samples ( Lsup ), consistency regulariza-tion under traffic-preserving perturbations ( Lcons ), confidence-aware pseudo-labeling for reliable unlabeled data ( Lpseudo ), and selectively applied temporal regularization ( Ltemp ). The overall objective ( Ltotal ) is 

Ltotal = Lsup + λcLcons + λpLpseudo + λtLtemp ,

Labeled samples are optimized using standard cross-entropy loss. For unlabeled samples, consistency regulariza-tion enforces stable predictions under carefully constrained augmentations that preserve NetFlow semantics and protocol validity. Temporal jitter is implemented by shifting window boundaries by at most ±5% of the window length, without reordering or duplicating flows, thereby preserving causal ordering. Feature masking is restricted to non-causal, derived features (e.g., entropy or aggregate statistics), while core counters such as packet counts, byte volumes, and flow durations are never masked; masked features are replaced with dataset level means, to avoid implausible artifacts. Noise injection is applied as small Gaussian perturbations bounded by feature specific variance and clipped to maintain non-negativity and protocol consistent ranges. Augmented samples violating NetFlow constraints (e.g., packet counts ≥ 1, byte counts consistent with packet counts, non-negative durations) are discarded. An exponential moving average (EMA) teacher model fθ′

is maintained to stabilize predictions on unlabeled data and to support agreement based filtering. The teacher is initialized from the student and updated as: 

θ′ ← αθ ′ + (1 − α)θ, 

with decay α = 0 .99 . Importantly, the EMA teacher is not used to generate pseudo-labels or enforce global consistency. Instead, it serves solely as a conservative reference for selec-tive temporal regularization, ensuring that temporal invariance is never imposed on uncertain or potentially malicious traffic. 

E. Selective Temporal Robustness 

Temporal invariance is enforced selectively to avoid sup-pressing attack specific dynamics. An unlabeled window xt

is deemed benign-consistent only if it satisfies all of the following criteria: 

(i) Confidence: max(ˆ yt, 1 − ˆyt) ≥ τb

(ii) Student-Teacher Agreement: 

|fθ (xt) − fθ′ (xt)| ≤ δEMA ,

(iii) Temporal Stability: Temporal stability is assessed over a short neighborhood of adjacent windows to iden-tify persistent benign behavior. During training and offline evaluation, stability is computed over a symmetric window 

{xt−k, . . . , x t+k} to improve robustness against transient fluc-tuations. In deployment, where future windows are unavail-able, the same criterion is applied using a causal variant that considers only past windows {xt−k, . . . , x t} with a bounded decision delay of k windows. This design ensures that RSST-NIDS remains deployable in online settings while allowing more reliable stability estimation during training. All reported online-relevant results use the causal formulation. 

Var ( {fθ (xt−k), . . . , f θ (xt+k)}) ≤ δtemp .

Only windows satisfying all three conditions are included in the benign-consistent set B. For windows admitted to the benign-consistent set B, we enforce temporal invariance directly in the latent representation space produced by the temporal encoder. Specifically, let zt = Eθ (xt) denote the latent embedding of window xt. The temporal invariance loss is defined as: 

Ltemp = 1

|B| 

X

> xt∈B

∥zt − zt+∆ ∥22 ,

where ∆ denotes a fixed temporal offset corresponding to adjacent windows (i.e., ∆ = 1 in all experiments). This loss penalizes abrupt changes in latent representations across time for traffic deemed benign-consistent, encouraging local temporal smoothness while avoiding constraints on uncertain or potentially malicious windows. We operate in the latent space rather than on logits or probabilities to regularize temporal representations without directly biasing the decision boundary. 

F. Training Procedure and Parameterization 

Algorithm 1 summarizes the complete training proce-dure. Labeled samples contribute supervised gradients, while unlabeled samples are incorporated conservatively through consistency regularization, confidence-aware pseudo-labeling, and selective temporal regularization. This design ensures that unlabeled data improves representation learning without amplifying noise or adversarial influence. Unless stated otherwise, gating parameters are fixed across all experiments: τb = 0 .95 , δEMA = 0 .05 , temporal neigh-borhood size k = 2 , and temporal stability threshold δtemp =0.01 . Temporal invariance is applied between adjacent win-dows ( ∆ = 1). These values are selected via validation on CIC-IDS2017 and reused unchanged for all cross-dataset evaluations, demonstrating that RSST-NIDS does not require dataset specific retuning. IV. E XPERIMENTAL SETUP 

A. Datasets and Evaluation Scope 

We evaluate RSST-NIDS on three publicly available flow-based NIDS datasets that capture realistic, heterogeneous cloud traffic. CIC-IDS2017 serves as the primary training and in-domain evaluation dataset, containing diverse benign and malicious activities (e.g., brute force, DoS/DDoS, botnet, infiltration). To assess robustness under distribution shift, we further evaluate on CSE-CIC-IDS2018, which extends CIC-IDS2017 with larger traffic volumes and additional attack types, and UNSW-NB15, which includes modern attack fami-lies and realistic benign traffic. All datasets are converted into flow-level windows before training. Table I reports the number of windows after cleaning and preprocessing; natural class imbalance is preserved to reflect realistic cloud environments.                    

> TABLE I DATASET STATISTICS AFTER CLEANING AND WINDOWING
> Dataset Split Samples Attack Ratio (%)
> CIC-IDS2017 Train 180K 18.5 Val 40K 17.9 Test 60K 18.2 CSE-CIC-IDS2018 Test 120K 16.7 UNSW-NB15 Test 100K 14.2

Following established guidelines on NIDS dataset relia-bility and feature leakage, we remove (i) flows with miss-ing or undefined features, (ii) duplicate flow records, (iii) flows with inconsistent NetFlow statistics (e.g., byte count 

< packet count), and (iv) mis-labeled or anomalous CIC-IDS2017 segments. All identifier and leakage-prone fields (timestamps, FlowIDs, IPs, ports, dataset-specific flags) are excluded to prevent artifact-based learning and ensure cross-dataset comparability. Consistent with prior analyses, we omit CIC-IDS2017 regions exhibiting labeling inconsistencies or abnormal traffic distri-butions (e.g., portions of WebAttack and Infiltration days). Filtering is applied conservatively to avoid skewing class ratios, and the same rules are used across datasets. Algorithm 1 Semi-Supervised Intrusion Detection Training 

Require: Labeled dataset XL = {(xi, y i)}NL

> i=1

, unlabeled dataset 

XU = {xj }NU

> j=1

, temporal encoder Eθ , classifier Cϕ, confidence threshold τ , loss weights λc, λ p, λ t, number of epochs E

Ensure: Trained intrusion detection model f (x) = Cϕ(Eθ (x))  

> 1:

Initialize θ, ϕ randomly  

> 2:

for epoch = 1 to E do  

> 3:

Supervised Learning Phase:  

> 4:

Sample mini-batch BL ⊆ X L 

> 5:

for each (xi, y i) ∈ BL do  

> 6:

zi ← Eθ (xi) 

> 7:

ˆyi ← Cϕ(zi) 

> 8:

end for  

> 9:

Compute supervised loss: Lsup ← CrossEntropy (ˆ yi, y i) 

> 10:

Unlabeled Data Processing:  

> 11:

Sample mini-batch BU ⊆ X U 

> 12:

Initialize confident set S ← ∅  

> 13:

for each xj ∈ BU do  

> 14:

Generate perturbed view: x′ 

> j

← A (xj ) {temporal jitter, masking, noise } 

> 15:

Forward pass: zj ← Eθ (xj ), z ′ 

> j

← Eθ (x′ 

> j

) 

> 16:

Predictions: ˆyj ← Cϕ(zj ), ˆy′ 

> j

← Cϕ(z′ 

> j

) 

> 17:

Consistency loss: Lcons + = ∥ˆyj − ˆy′ 

> j

∥22 

> 18:

Confidence-aware pseudo-labeling:  

> 19:

if ˆyj ≥ τ then  

> 20:

˜yj ← 1 

> 21:

S ← S ∪ { (xj , ˜yj )} 

> 22:

else if ˆyj ≤ 1 − τ then  

> 23:

˜yj ← 0 

> 24:

S ← S ∪ { (xj , ˜yj )} 

> 25:

end if  

> 26:

end for  

> 27:

Benign-Consistent Window Selection:  

> 28:

for each xt ∈ BU do  

> 29:

if confidence, EMA agreement, and temporal stability criteria satisfied then  

> 30:

B ← B ∪ { xt} 

> 31:

end if  

> 32:

end for  

> 33:

Temporal Invariance Loss:  

> 34:

for each xt ∈ B do  

> 35:

Ltemp + = ∥Eθ (xt) − Eθ (xt+∆ )∥22 

> 36:

end for  

> 37:

Pseudo-Label Supervision:  

> 38:

if S̸ = ∅ then  

> 39:

for each (xj , ˜yj ) ∈ S do  

> 40:

ˆyj ← Cϕ(Eθ (xj ))  

> 41:

Lpseudo + = CrossEntropy (ˆ yj , ˜yj ) 

> 42:

end for  

> 43:

else  

> 44:

Lpseudo ← 0 

> 45:

end if  

> 46:

Total Loss:  

> 47:

Ltotal ← L sup + λcLcons + λpLpseudo + λtLtemp  

> 48:

Update θ, ϕ using gradient descent on Ltotal  

> 49:

end for  

> 50:

return f (x)

CIC-IDS2017 is split strictly by time: earlier days for training, intermediate traffic for validation, and later days for testing, with no day shared across splits. Cross-dataset experiments train solely on CIC-IDS2017 and evaluate on CSE-CIC-IDS2018 and UNSW-NB15 without fine-tuning. All metrics are averaged over n = 5 runs with different random seeds. Statistical significance is assessed using paired Wilcoxon signed-rank tests ( p < 0.01 ), where pairs corre-spond to identical seeds and splits across models. 

B. Feature Extraction and Data Sanitization 

To ensure consistency across datasets, we extract flow-level features using CICFlowMeter v4, avoiding packet payloads to preserve privacy and scalability. Fields known to introduce information leakage or dataset-specific artifacts e.g., times-tamps, flow identifiers, IP addresses, labels, and exporter-specific flags are removed prior to training. Traffic segments previously identified as mislabeled or anomalous are excluded following established dataset cleaning practices. This prepro-cessing ensures that performance gains reflect model robust-ness rather than unintended leakage. All augmented samples used for consistency regularization are validated against the same NetFlow constraints applied during preprocessing, en-suring protocol-consistent traffic throughout training. 

C. Training Protocol 

Training follows a strictly time-ordered protocol to pre-serve causality and emulate realistic cloud traffic observation. Models are warm-started on labeled data, after which semi-supervised learning is enabled by progressively incorporat-ing unlabeled samples. Pseudo-labeling uses a conservative confidence threshold τ , and samples failing confidence or agreement criteria are excluded from supervision. Unless stated otherwise, experiments use temporal windows of length 

T = 20 with stride 5 and F = 78 flow-level features. Mini-batches contain labeled and unlabeled samples in a 1:4 ratio (batch size 256). The Transformer encoder has 4 layers, 4 attention heads, hidden size 128, and dropout 0.1. Traffic-preserving augmentations include temporal jitter ( ±5% ), fea-ture masking (10%), and Gaussian noise ( σ = 0 .01 ). Loss weights are λc = 1 .0, λp = 0 .5, and λt = 0 .2. Models are trained for 50 epochs using Adam (learning rate 10 −3, cosine decay). In addition to the default 10% labeled setting, we evaluate a 5% labeled regime to assess label efficiency. To prevent temporal leakage, datasets are split chronologically. For CIC-IDS2017, training uses Monday and Tuesday traffic, validation uses Wednesday, and testing uses Thursday and Friday, ensuring no overlap across splits. Cross-dataset exper-iments are trained exclusively on CIC-IDS2017 and evaluated on CSE-CIC-IDS2018 or UNSW-NB15 without fine-tuning. This setup ensures that reported results reflect generalization under temporal drift rather than memorization. 

D. Baseline Methods 

We compare RSST-NIDS against representative supervised, unsupervised, and semi-supervised NIDS baselines under identical feature representations, labeled data budgets, splits, and training settings to ensure fairness. Supervised base-lines include CNN-, LSTM-, and Transformer-based models, covering common spatial and temporal architectures. The unsupervised baseline is an autoencoder trained on benign traffic, where anomalies are detected via reconstruction error. For semi-supervised learning, we consider four approaches: (i) FixMatch-style pseudo-labeling [16] with high-confidence hard labels, (ii) SimCLR-style contrastive pretraining [17] followed by fine-tuning, (iii) class-aware SSL (CCSSL) [18] combining confidence-weighted pseudo-labels with con-trastive learning, and (iv) Mean Teacher [19], enforcing con-sistency under perturbations without temporal gating. None explicitly model temporal consistency or perform benign-consistency verification. We exclude AnomalyAID, SS-VTCN, and DI-NIDS due to differing assumptions: reconstruction-based verification, global temporal reconstruction, or access to target-domain data during training. In contrast, RSST-NIDS targets con-servative semi-supervised learning under adversarial contam-ination without target-domain access, making the selected baselines the most relevant for comparison. 

E. Adversarial Contamination and Evasion Evaluation 

We evaluate robustness under realistic black-box adversar-ial settings constrained by protocol-valid traffic. 

Poisoning. Adversarial samples are injected into the un-labeled set at 5%, 10%, and 15% contamination. Malicious flows are modified to match benign first-order statistics (e.g., duration, packet count, byte rate) while preserving temporal structure and attack semantics. 

Evasion. At test time, adversarial flows are generated via constrained traffic morphing: 

xadv = αx attack + (1 − α)xbenign , α ∈ [0 .6, 0.8] (1) All samples are projected onto valid NetFlow feature space. We also evaluate transfer-based attacks, where morphing parameters are tuned on a surrogate model and applied to RSST-NIDS. These attacks capture realistic constraints faced by network-level adversaries and provide a conservative assess-ment of robustness under black-box conditions. V. R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

This section evaluates the proposed RSST-NIDS framework under realistic cloud deployment conditions. We first assess detection performance and generalization under limited label and cross-dataset settings. We then examine robustness to adversarial contamination and evasion, followed by ablation, sensitivity, and calibration analyses. 

A. Overall Detection Performance and Generalization 

We begin by comparing RSST-NIDS with supervised, un-supervised, and semi-supervised baselines when only 10% of the training data is labeled, with the remaining traffic treated as unlabeled and potentially adversarial. Table II summarizes in-domain performance on CIC-IDS2017. RSST-NIDS consistently outperforms all baselines across accuracy, F1-score, and AUROC, achieving a 2-3% absolute F1-score improvement over recent SSL-based NIDS despite severe class imbalance and limited labeled data. These gains indicate                                                                                                 

> TABLE II DETECTION PERFORMANCE ON CIC-IDS2017.
> Model Accuracy (%) F1-score (%) AUROC
> CNN (Supervised) 91.2 88.5 0.921 LSTM (Supervised) 92.4 89.6 0.934 Transformer (Supervised) 93.1 90.2 0.941 Autoencoder (Unsupervised) 84.7 79.3 0.861 SSL-NIDS (FixMatch-style) 94.0 91.1 0.952 SSL-NIDS (SimCLR-style) 94.6 91.8 0.958 SSL-NIDS (Mean Teacher) 95.0 92.3 0.962 SSL (CCSSL-style) 95.3 92.6 0.965
> RSST-NIDS (Proposed) 96.3 94.5 0.973
> TABLE III CROSS -D ATASET GENERALIZATION PERFORMANCE (M EAN ±STD )
> Model Metric CIC →CSE-CIC CIC →UNSW
> Transformer (Supervised) AUROC 0.802 ±0.011 0.765 ±0.014
> MCC 0.41 ±0.03 0.37 ±0.04
> SSL (Contrastive) AUROC 0.836 ±0.009 0.801 ±0.012
> MCC 0.49 ±0.02 0.46 ±0.03
> CCSSL-style AUROC 0.851 ±0.010 0.814 ±0.011
> MCC 0.52 ±0.03 0.48 ±0.03
> RSST-NIDS (Proposed) AUROC 0.889 ±0.008 0.847 ±0.010
> MCC 0.61 ±0.02 0.57 ±0.03

that conservative exploitation of unlabeled traffic improves detection without increasing false alarms. To evaluate robustness under distribution shift, we con-duct cross-dataset transfer experiments by training on CIC-IDS2017 and testing on CSE-CIC-IDS2018 and UNSW-NB15 without fine-tuning. Results are reported using AUROC (deci-mal form) and Matthews Correlation Coefficient (MCC), aver-aged over five runs. As shown in Table III, supervised models suffer substantial degradation under distribution shift, while semi-supervised baselines provide moderate improvements. RSST-NIDS achieves the strongest generalization across both target datasets, with particularly large gains in MCC, indicat-ing more reliable detection under class imbalance. From an operational perspective, these MCC improvements correspond to fewer false positives at comparable detection rates, reducing analyst fatigue in large scale cloud deployments. All reported F1-scores are macro-averaged unless stated otherwise. To further analyze generalization behavior, Table IV reports per-attack F1-scores aggregated by attack category. RSST-NIDS shows notable improvements for low-frequency and stealthy attacks, such as infiltration and command-and-control traffic, which are challenging due to their temporal sparsity and similarity to benign behavior. Improvements over the strongest baseline are statistically significant based on paired Wilcoxon signed-rank tests ( p < 0.01 ) for both AUROC and MCC. 

B. Robustness to Adversarial Contamination and Evasion 

We evaluate robustness to adversarial contamination by injecting poisoned samples into the unlabeled training set at rates of 5%, 10%, and 15%. Table V reports detection performance along with the fraction of unlabeled windows admitted as benign-consistent. As contamination increases, baseline SSL methods degrade rapidly due to confirmation bias. In contrast, RSST-NIDS maintains stable AUROC and TABLE IV PER -A TTACK CATEGORY DETECTION PERFORMANCE (F1-SCORE %)                                  

> Attack Category Transformer SSL (Contrastive) RSST-NIDS
> DoS / DDoS 88.3 90.7 94.9
> Brute Force 71.4 76.2 83.5
> Infiltration 62.1 66.8 74.3
> Web Attacks 68.9 72.5 80.1
> Botnet / C2 73.6 77.9 85.4
> TABLE V IMPACT OF DATA POISONING ON RSST-NIDS P ERFORMANCE
> Poisoning AUROC MCC Admitted (%)
> 5% 0.97 0.61 42% 10% 0.95 0.58 31% 15% 0.93 0.54 22%

MCC while conservatively reducing the proportion of admit-ted unlabeled windows. At 15% contamination, fewer than 22% of unlabeled windows are admitted, effectively limiting adversarial influence. Evasion robustness is evaluated via constrained traffic morphing with parameter α ∈ [0 .6, 0.8] . As α increases, attack success rates rise for supervised and contrastive SSL baselines, reflecting vulnerability to traffic mimicry. RSST-NIDS degrades more gracefully, with AUROC dropping by less than 4% at α = 0 .8. Under transfer-based black-box attacks, increased student-teacher disagreement causes most adversarial samples to be rejected by the benign-consistency gate. We further analyze mis-gating behavior by measuring the false gate rate, defined as the fraction of malicious windows incorrectly admitted as benign-consistent. Across datasets, this rate remains below 6% under nominal conditions and increases modestly under drift. Importantly, mis-gating has limited impact on overall detection performance due to conservative loss weighting and continued supervision from labeled data. Failure analysis reveals that most mis-gated samples correspond to low rate, slowly evolving attacks with feature distributions close to benign traffic. Under such condi-tions, RSST-NIDS degrades gracefully by reducing unlabeled admission rather than amplifying false confidence. This be-havior reflects a conservative bias toward false negatives over false positives, which is preferable in operational settings. 

C. Ablation, Sensitivity, and Calibration Analysis 

Table VI reports ablation results on CIC-IDS2017. Re-moving confidence-aware pseudo-labeling causes the largest performance drop, confirming its importance in suppressing adversarial contamination. Eliminating temporal invariance also degrades robustness under drift, while removing all SSL components reduces the model to a conventional supervised IDS. We analyze sensitivity to the pseudo-label confidence threshold τ ∈ [0 .90 , 0.99] . The best performance is achieved at τ = 0 .95 , admitting approximately 35–45% of unlabeled samples. A simple annealing schedule from 0.99 to 0.95 provides marginal stability gains under drift. Unless stated otherwise, benign-consistency thresholds are set to τb = 0 .95 ,

δEMA = 0 .05 , and δtemp = 0 .01 . Performance varies smoothly within ±20% of these values, indicating low sensitivity. We also evaluated alternative window sizes ( T ∈ { 10 , 20 , 30 })and strides, observing consistent trends and no evidence of overfitting to a specific temporal granularity or CICFlowMeter feature configuration. We additionally evaluated threshold variations up to ±40% under cross-dataset transfer and ob-served smooth performance degradation without abrupt failure modes, indicating that RSST-NIDS is not overly sensitive to precise threshold tuning across attack families. Confidence reliability is evaluated using Expected Cali-bration Error (ECE) and risk–coverage curves. RSST-NIDS exhibits lower ECE under temporal drift compared to SSL baselines, and high-confidence predictions retain strong ac-curacy as coverage decreases, supporting the reliability of confidence-based pseudo-labeling and temporal gating.                

> TABLE VI ABLATION STUDY OF RSST-NIDS C OMPONENTS . (-) INDICATES THE REMOVAL OF THE NAMED COMPONENT FROM THE MODEL .
> Model Variant F1-score (%) AUROC
> Full RSST-NIDS 94.5 0.973
> - Confidence-aware pseudo-labeling 91.7 0.952 - Temporal invariance loss 92.1 0.957 - Consistency regularization 90.9 0.946 - All SSL components (Supervised only) 89.8 0.938

D. Computational Overhead 

We evaluate the computational overhead of RSST-NIDS compared to representative baselines. Training is performed on a single NVIDIA T4 GPU. RSST-NIDS requires approximately 1.3 times the training time of a supervised Transformer due to additional consis-tency and temporal losses. Average training time is 2.4 hours for 50 epochs on CIC-IDS2017, compared to 1.8 hours for the supervised baseline. Inference latency is dominated by the temporal encoder and averages 0.8 ms per flow window on GPU and 6-8 ms on CPU-only deployment, enabling near-real-time processing of high-throughput cloud traffic. Memory footprint during train-ing is approximately 1.2 GB GPU memory, comparable to standard Transformer-based NIDS, with negligible overhead from the EMA teacher (not used during inference). These results indicate that RSST-NIDS achieves improved robustness with modest computational overhead, making it practical for deployment in cloud monitoring pipelines. VI. C ONCLUSION AND OUTLOOK 

In this paper, we studied network intrusion detection in cloud environments under realistic conditions of limited la-beled data, non-stationary traffic, and adversarial behavior. Although SSL has been proposed to address label scarcity, existing SSL-based NIDS often assume benign unlabeled data and degrade under adversarial contamination and temporal drift, limiting their practicality in operational cloud settings. To address this gap, we proposed RSST-NIDS, a robust semi-supervised temporal learning framework that leverages the temporal structure of network traffic while conservatively exploiting unlabeled data. By combining confidence-aware pseudo-labeling, consistency regularization, and selective tem-poral invariance, RSST-NIDS reduces the influence of un-reliable or malicious unlabeled samples without suppressing attack dynamics. Unlike prior SSL-based NIDS, it does not rely on benign-unlabeled assumptions and is explicitly designed for adversarial and non-stationary environments. We evaluate RSST-NIDS in a binary benign-versus-malicious setting, which matches the primary operational goal of large-scale cloud intrusion detection under severe class imbalance and supports more reliable discrimination under label scarcity and adversarial contamination. Comprehensive experiments on publicly available network traffic datasets show that RSST-NIDS consistently outper-forms state-of-the-art supervised and semi-supervised base-lines under limited-label conditions. The method achieves stronger cross-dataset generalization, reduced degradation un-der distribution shift, and more stable detection of stealthy and low-frequency attacks, demonstrating the value of robustness-aware semi-supervised learning with selective temporal veri-fication. 

A. Future Work 

Several directions remain for future research. RSST-NIDS can be extended to multi-class intrusion detection by replacing the binary classifier with a multi-class prediction head and adopting class-wise confidence thresholds. However, under severe class imbalance, pseudo-label confidence becomes less reliable for minority attack classes, and benign-consistency gating may bias learning toward dominant classes. Robust multi-class attribution under adversarial and label-scarce con-ditions therefore remains an important open problem. Additional extensions include incorporating richer context, such as host-level behavior or service dependency graphs, to improve detection of multi-stage and lateral-movement attacks, and enabling online or continual learning to adapt to long-term traffic evolution in cloud environments. Future work may also integrate explicit adversarial defenses, including adversarial training or certified robustness methods, as well as privacy-preserving and federated learning for collaborative detection across distributed clouds. Improving interpretability through post-hoc explanations or stability-based feature attri-bution is also important for operational adoption and analyst trust. ACKNOWLEDGMENT 

The authors acknowledge the financial support by the Fed-eral Ministry of Research, Technology and Space of Germany in the projects Open6GHub+ (Grant No. 16KIS2402K) and CASTLE (Grant No. 16KIS1906K). REFERENCES [1] A. L. Buczak and E. Guven, “ASurvey of Data Mining and Machine Learning Methods for Cyber Security Intrusion Detection,” IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials , vol. 18, no. 2, pp. 1153–1176, 2016. DOI : 10.1109/COMST.2015.2494502 [2] R. Sommer and V. Paxson, “Outside the Closed World: On Using Machine Learning for Network Intrusion Detection,” in 2010 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy , 2010, pp. 305–316. DOI : 10 . 1109/SP.2010.25 [3] R. Zuech, T. M. Khoshgoftaar, and R. Wald, “Intrusion detection and big heterogeneous data: a survey,” Journal of Big Data , vol. 2, no. 1, p. 3, 2015. [4] M. Ring, S. Wunderlich, D. Scheuring, D. Landes, and A. Hotho, “Asurvey of network-based intrusion detection data sets,” Computers & security , vol. 86, pp. 147–167, 2019. [5] M. A. Ferrag, L. Maglaras, H. Janicke, and R. Smith, “Deep learning techniques for cyber security intrusion detection: A detailed analysis,” in 6th International Symposium for ICS & SCADA Cyber Security Research 2019 , BCS Learning & Development, 2019. [6] N. Shone, T. N. Ngoc, V. D. Phai, and Q. Shi, “Adeep learning ap-proach to network intrusion detection,” IEEE transactions on emerging topics in computational intelligence , vol. 2, no. 1, pp. 41–50, 2018. [7] X. Lian, Y. Zheng, Z. Dang, C. Peng, and X. Gao, “Semi-supervised anomaly traffic detection via multi-frequency reconstruction,” Pattern Recognition , vol. 161, p. 111 215, 2025. [8] S. Layeghy, M. Baktashmotlagh, and M. Portmann, “DI-NIDS: Do-main invariant network intrusion detection system,” Knowledge-Based Systems , vol. 273, p. 110 626, 2023. [9] L. Chen, X. Kuang, A. Xu, S. Suo, and Y. Yang, “Anovel network intrusion detection system based on CNN,” in 2020 eighth interna-tional conference on advanced cloud and big data (CBD) , IEEE, 2020, pp. 243–247. [10] S. H. Park, H. J. Park, and Y.-J. Choi, “RNN-based prediction for network intrusion detection,” in 2020 international conference on artificial intelligence in information and communication (ICAIIC) ,IEEE, 2020, pp. 572–574. [11] U. C. Akuthota and L. Bhargava, “Transformer based intrusion detection for iot networks,” IEEE Internet of Things Journal , 2025. [12] H. Choi, M. Kim, G. Lee, and W. Kim, “Unsupervised learning approach for network intrusion detection system using autoencoders.,” 

Journal of supercomputing , vol. 75, no. 9, 2019. [13] Y. Yuan, Y. Huang, Y. Wu, and J. Wang, “AnomalyAID: Reliable In-terpretation for Semi-supervised Network Anomaly Detection,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.11293 , 2024. [14] Y. Jia, Y. Cheng, and J. Shi, “Semi-supervised variational temporal convolutional network for IoT communication multi-anomaly detec-tion,” in Proceedings of the 2022 3rd International Conference on Control, Robotics and Intelligent System , 2022, pp. 67–73. [15] M. Shen, J. Wu, K. Ye, K. Xu, G. Xiong, and L. Zhu, “Robust Detection of Malicious Encrypted Traffic via Contrastive Learning,” 

IEEE Transactions on Information Forensics and Security , 2025. [16] K. Sohn, D. Berthelot, N. Carlini, Z. Zhang, H. Zhang, C. A. Raffel, E. D. Cubuk, A. Kurakin, and C.-L. Li, “Fixmatch: Simplifying semi-supervised learning with consistency and confidence,” Advances in neural information processing systems , vol. 33, pp. 596–608, 2020. [17] M. Kim, J. Tack, and S. J. Hwang, “Adversarial self-supervised con-trastive learning,” Advances in neural information processing systems ,vol. 33, pp. 2983–2994, 2020. [18] J. Kim, D. Kim, E. Cho, H. H. Tran, J. Hong, D. Lee, J. Hong, I.-Y. Yoon, J.-W. Kim, H. Jang, et al., “Sound-Based Sleep Staging By Exploiting Real-World Unlabeled Data,” in ICLR 2023 Workshop on Time Series Representation Learning for Health .[19] A. Tarvainen and H. Valpola, “Mean teachers are better role models: Weight-averaged consistency targets improve semi-supervised deep learning results,” Advances in neural information processing systems ,vol. 30, 2017.