Title: Expanding into Reality: Random Graphs for Datacenter Networks

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.15261v1

Published Time: Fri, 17 Apr 2026 01:17:49 GMT

Number of Pages: 26

Markdown Content:
# Expanding into Reality: Random Graphs for Datacenter Networks 

# Giacomo Bernardi, Ratul Mahajan, C. Seshadhri, Enrico Carlesso, Chinchu Merine Joseph, Saurabh Kumar, Pavan Manikonda, Luiza Popa, Randy Ram, Steven Robinson, Elizabeth Tennent 

Amazon Web Services 

## ABSTRACT 

We design and deploy at Amazon the first production data-center fabrics based on random graphs. While the cost and fault-tolerance benefits of such topologies have been long known, their practical realization has been hampered by a lack of scalable routing and cabling approaches. Our design, called RNG , has a new distributed routing protocol that ex-ploits the properties of random graphs to find a large number of edge disjoint paths between endpoint pairs. A novel pas-sive optical device that internally shuffles cable endpoints makes RNG ’s cabling complexity similar to that of fat trees. We show that RNG fabrics match or exceed the performance of fat trees for a range of traffic patterns, despite being up to 45% cheaper. At Amazon, we made RNG the default datacen-ter fabric for most workloads. 

## 1 INTRODUCTION 

The simplicity of fat tree topologies has made them the workhorse of datacenter networks. But they offer a stark trade-off between cost and performance. Operators either build non-blocking fabrics in which any endpoint can trans-mit/receive at its full capacity; or they build oversubscribed fabrics that congest when a small, unfavorable set of end-points transmit/receive at a high rate. Non-blocking fabrics are prohibitively expensive at scale, so organizations tend to build oversubscribed fabrics and risk congestion even for performance-sensitive workloads [14, 37, 40]. The root problem is that fat trees lack capacity fungibility .The strict hierarchical structure means traffic between pairs of endpoints is limited to small subsets of links in the topol-ogy. These links can congest while most others lie idle. The lack of capacity fungibility increases the cost of providing a consistent, congestion-free experience. One must provision ample capacity everywhere even if a small subset of endpoint pairs need high capacity at any given time. Researchers have proposed reconfigurable topologies for this problem [ 10 , 15 , 19 , 20 , 27 – 29 , 48 , 57 ]. These designs use hardware such as optical switches, steerable wireless anten-nas, and free-space optical devices to dynamically change ca-pacity between endpoints. Such hardware is not (yet) proven at scale. Most designs also use a centralized control plane to infer fabric-wide demand and configure the hardware. Such control planes are difficult to realize at scale for bursty, latency-sensitive workloads such as Web services. A promising alternative that provides capacity fungibility is a flat topology with commodity routers connected as an expander graph [ 22 , 23 , 34 , 42 , 46 ]. In addition to their lower cost, such topologies are fault tolerant because the blast radius of any failure is small, unlike upper-layer failures in fat trees. These benefits of expander network topologies have been known for over a decade [ 42 ], but these topologies are not a reality because of three unsolved challenges [30, 40]. 

1. Routing . Shortest-path routing, commonly used for fat trees, is a poor fit for expanders because it cannot exploit the diversity of paths that exist. Some pairs of nodes have only one shortest path between them, so shortest path routing can cause congestion. Prior works recommend 𝑘 -shortest paths routing which spreads traffic between the source and destination across 𝑘 shortest paths [ 42 , 46 ]. But 𝑘 -shortest paths routing cannot be realized for large networks using commodity switches. It needs an order of magnitude more (fast, expensive) memory than what is available today (§3). 

2. Cabling . Expanders connect pairs of devices that can be far away in the physical space. Such cabling is complex and expensive [ 30 ]. Worse, when more racks land, the process of incrementally adding new routers requires breaking existing connections. If routers have 𝑑 links to other routers, each time a router lands, we need to break 𝑑 /2 existing links whose endpoints are physically spread over the datacenter. This type of work risks collateral damage and slows down rack installs, a key concern for datacenter operators. 

3. Performance predictability . Prior work on benchmark-ing expanders focus on concrete topologies with fixed pa-rameters. It is unclear how a fabric might perform for other parameters, which makes it difficult for operators to de-sign topologies that meet specific performance targets. They would need to search the combinatorial parameter space using simulations, which is infeasible for large networks. In contrast, fat tree designs can be automatically generated based on performance targets [2, 33, 38]. We solve these challenges and deploy (to our knowledge) the first production datacenter fabrics based on expanders. 

> 1
> arXiv:2604.15261v1 [cs.NI] 16 Apr 2026

Our design, called RNG , connects routers as a random graph, a type of expander. Our new routing algorithm called Spray-point is purpose-built for random expander graphs and per-mits a fully distributed implementation on commodity hard-ware. It finds a large number—close to the node degree—of edge disjoint paths between each endpoint pair and these paths minimally overlap across different pairs. These prop-erties lead to capacity fungibility and high throughput. We develop a cabling approach based on a new passive optical device called a ShuffleBox that mixes connections between routers internally. We place shuffle ShuffleBoxes at a small number of planned locations in the datacenter. This allows the number of physically-connected location pairs, a key driver of cabling complexity, to match that of fat trees. The concentration properties of random graphs and the decorrelation of Spraypoint routing enable accurate mod-eling of RNG fabric performance as a function of topology parameters (e.g., graph size, node degree, etc.). We develop models for path length, number of edge disjoint paths, and oversubscription. The models make the impact of various parameters and design trade-offs (e.g., path length versus oversubscription) transparent. Operators can use them to design topologies that meet their performance targets. We deploy two RNG -based production fabrics. Transport and application layer benchmarks confirm that RNG ’s per-formance is on par with fat trees, unimpacted by the pecu-liarities of expanders such as variable path lengths between endpoint pairs. Such end-to-end validation is a first for ex-pander topologies. Our analysis reveals that RNG topologies are 9–45% cheaper than fat trees with equivalent oversubscription ratio. The extent of cost reduction depends on the oversubscription ratio and is independent of network size and the number of switch ports. We also find that, for the same oversubscription ratio, RNG offers higher throughput than fat trees across a range of traffic patterns. 

## 2 THE POTENTIAL OF EXPANDERS 

The salient property of expander graphs is edge expansion [ 50 ]. For every minority subset 𝑆 of nodes, the set of edges that lead out of 𝑆 , called the cut, is large. Edge expansion provides capacity fungibility because every 𝑆 has large bandwidth to-ward other nodes. In contrast, in hierarchical topologies such as fat trees, the cut of a subtree only leads to parents, so the expansion is poor. We illustrate with an example. Figure 1a shows a generalized fat tree [ 35 ]. T1–T12 are ToR (top-of-rack) switches, connected via aggregation (middle) and spine (top) layers. The oversubscription ratio of this network is 3:1 since the capacity of the ToR-aggregation layer is thrice that of the aggregation-spine layer. The cut for subset of nodes with T1–T3 and their two parents is two links T3 T1 T2 T6 T4 T5 T9 T7 T8 T12 T10 T11      

> (a) T3 T1 T2
> T6 T4 T5
> T9 T7 T8
> T12 T10 T11 (b)

Figure 1: Example fat tree (a) and expander topologies (b). Each switch has four ports. Two ports of each ToR (T1–T12) connect to servers (not shown). 

connecting to the spines. These nodes cannot send more than two units of traffic to T4-T12 even though most other links in the fabric are unused. Thus, capacity is stranded. While skewed traffic patterns with a few heavy transmit-ters have received the most attention [ 22 , 23 ], fat trees can strand capacity with uniform traffic as well. Consider an all-to-all pattern where each ToR wants to send the same data to each other ToR. The transmission rate between pairs of ToRs will be 812 ×9 of link capacity. This calculation follows from the 12 × 9 flows crossing the 8 aggregation-spine links. Given two units of per-ToR capacity, this traffic pattern strands roughly 60% ( 2 − 11 812 ×9 ) of the ToR uplink capacity. Expanders, such as the random graph between T1–T12 in Figure 1b, can do significantly better. If T1–T3 are the only senders, they will be limited largely by their local capacity when other nodes are silent. Because of the expansion prop-erty, there is no small cut that constrains traffic. Even for the all-to-all traffic pattern, given a capable routing algorithm, we can effectively use all links in the topology. Capacity fungibility lowers cost because the deployed ca-pacity is more efficiently used, allowing smaller deployments. A simplistic view of the lower cost of flat expanders is that all upper-layer routers are removed. But an expander that is performance-equivalent to a fat tree may need more ToR uplinks (fabric-facing ports) because some uplink capacity is consumed by traffic relayed for other ToRs. It may thus need more ToRs to support the same number of servers, given a fixed number of ports per ToR. Despite this effect, expanders can reduce cost by up to 45% (§9.4). Expander topologies are also more fault-tolerant. Edge expansion makes it difficult to partition the network, and flat structure lowers the impact of failures. In a fat tree, upper-layer router failures have a large impact because they carry traffic for many endpoint pairs. Even a single spine router failure in Figure 1a halves the available capacity for most ToR pairs. In Figure 1b, there are no such special routers. We focus on multi-tenant datacenters with heterogeneous workloads. In the future, we will investigate using expanders 

> 2

for specialized workloads such as large-scale AI training. These workloads may demand specific topologies such as Rail-optimized fat trees and may want local capacity islands such as those at the aggregation layer in Figure 1a [ 24 , 56 ]. Flat, random topologies do not have aggregation islands. 1

## 3 REQUIREMENTS AND CHALLENGES 

Expander topologies are theoretically promising. But to be practical at scale at Amazon and supplant fat trees, they must meet several requirements. Prior expander-based designs [ 4 ,42, 46] do not meet these requirements. 

Realizable using commodity switches . The network should be realizable using commodity switches and forwarding ASICs which have limited memory. While custom hardware can be developed, it increases cost and poses substantial technical and supply-chain risks. Prior designs cannot be realized for large networks using commodity switches. To counter the limitations of shortest paths in expander graphs, they usually propose 𝑘 -shortest paths routing. Its typical implementation requires tunnels (e.g., MPLS, VLAN [ 32 ]) or forwarding based on source (in addition to destination) addresses. Suppose we want to build a network with 𝑛 =10K routers and use the recommended value of 𝑘 =8 [ 42 , 46 ]. If each path traverses 4 routers, we need 320K forwarding entries per router on average ( 4𝑘𝑛 2

entries spread across 𝑛 routers). Current switches support only 4-16K such entries, 2 which is 20–80x lower. State reduc-tion techniques [ 44 , 45 ] cannot bridge this gap and adding so much memory is prohibitively expensive. Harsh et al. cleverly use VRFs (virtual routing and forwarding) to create non-shortest paths, but this proposal too does not scale given limits on the number of VRFs in commodity switches [21]. 

Deployment and operational simplicity . Deployment and operational simplicity are critical for network reliability. Simplicity is multi-faceted; we focus on control plane and physical operations to deploy and incrementally expand the network. For the control plane, we prefer demand-oblivious, fully distributed routing (like today). For deployment and expansion, we want the number of cabling steps to be small and fast to minimize risk and expand faster.  

> 1RNG does have rack-level islands like fat trees. The lack of aggregation islands is not a problem for general workloads in multi-tenant datacenters. Coordinated application deployment across topologically related racks is hard to realize here; tenants come and go continuously, with each needing different server counts and types. That is why hyperscalers aim for fabric-wide, uniform capacity pools [16].
> 2This table is different from the much larger table for destination-based lookup which uses longest-prefix matching.

Physical cabling is challenging for expanders because they need to connect pairs of devices uncorrelated to phys-ical space. Jellyfish proposes to simplify cabling by remov-ing routers (ToRs) from server racks and placing them cen-trally [ 42 ], but this approach increases latency between servers that share a rack, an important consideration for some appli-cations. It also increases cabling cost because cheap, copper-based intra-rack connectivity would need to be replaced with expensive, optical connectivity. All current approaches also require changing many existing connections each time a new rack lands, a frequent operation in datacenters. 

Predictable performance . Amazon operators deploy net-work fabrics to meet specific capacity (number of servers) and performance (e.g., oversubscription) targets. For expanders to be acceptable, they must be able to easily and confidently create topologies that meet their targets. Prior work bench-marks topologies with specific parameters and does not show how to create topologies for specific performance targets. 

RNG meets these three requirements via: (1) A new rout-ing algorithm called Spraypoint that finds a large number of edge-disjoint paths. Like OSPF and BGP, it is demand-oblivious and permits a fully-distributed operation on com-modity hardware. (2) A cabling approach based on a passive optical device called a ShuffleBoxes . It limits the number of endpoints that are physically cabled/re-cabled when the data-center expands. (3) High-fidelity models for key performance measures such as throughput and path length. We describe these elements in more detail below. 

## 4 RNG OVERVIEW 

RNG is based on a flat graph where routers interconnect randomly subject to degree constraints. Such random graphs are optimal expanders [ 36 ]. 3 Routers connect to other fabric routers and to external devices (e.g., servers, other fabrics). We break out each fabric-facing physical port into individual lanes (e.g., a 400 Gbps port into 4x100 Gbps lanes), each of which uses a separate fiber pair and can establish adjacency with a different remote router. Breakouts increase graph degree, lowering hop count and oversubscription. In the rest of the paper, a router uplink refers to a breakout lane. The control plane and load balancing in RNG follows to-day’s common paradigm. The routing protocol, Spraypoint, computes next hops at each router for all destinations; and routers use ECMP (equal cost multipath) to spread traffic across all next hops for the destination. Figure 2 summarizes the key design parameters of RNG .  

> 3Further, unlike structured constructions like Xpander [ 46 ] and Slim fly [4], random graphs can support routers with different degrees [ 42 ]. RNG
> supports such routers, but we omit this discussion for lack of space. 3

Graph 𝑛 , 𝑑 # of routers, router uplinks 

Spraypoint 𝑝 , ℎ # of waypoints, next hops 

ℓ # of levels 

ShuffleBoxes 𝑑 𝑟 , 𝑑 𝑐 # of r-ports, c-ports 

𝑓 𝑟 , 𝑓 𝑐 # of fiber pairs in r-port, c-port 

Figure 2: Key design parameters of RNG 

## 5 SPRAYPOINT ROUTING 

Spraypoint constructs a large number of edge disjoint paths between endpoint pairs, which increases network through-put by offering more independent options to load balanc-ing mechanisms like ECMP. While we analyze and deploy it on random graphs, Spraypoint works on any expander graph. It is based on the observation that high fan-out at the source and high fan-in at the destination suffice for creating many edge-disjoint paths in an expander. The middle has many edges because of the expansion property. Spraypoint achieves high fan-out by spraying packets at the source—all neighbors are eligible next hops and one is selected based on ECMP hashing. It achieves high fan-in by channeling traffic via waypoints that are spread all around the destination. 

Forwarding paths . Spraypoint has two parameters 𝑝 and 

ℎ which control the number of waypoints per destination and the number of eligible next hops after the spraying step. These parameters offer a trade-off between path length and the number of edge disjoint paths. There is an auxiliary pa-rameter ℓ which depends on these parameters and the graph size ( 𝑛 ). To compute paths to a destination 𝑡 , Spraypoint partitions all nodes into the following levels .(1) 𝑊 𝑃 0 (𝑡 ): Base waypoint level with all neighbors of 𝑡 .(2) 𝑊 𝑃 𝑙 ∈ [ 1,ℓ ] (𝑡 ): Higher-level waypoints. 𝑊 𝑃 𝑙 (𝑡 ) has 𝑝 

randomly-selected neighbors of each node in 𝑊 𝑃 𝑙 −1 (𝑡 ). Neigh-bors in earlier waypoint levels and 𝑡 itself are not eligible for selection. (3) 𝐼𝑅 (𝑡 ): Inner ring with all neighbors of 𝑊 𝑃 ℓ (𝑡 ) not in previous levels. (4) 𝑂𝑅 (𝑡 ): Outer ring with all nodes not in any level above. Figure 3 shows an example graph for ℓ=1 and 𝑝 =2. 𝑊 𝑃 0 (𝑡 )

has all neighbors of 𝑡 : {𝑣 1, 𝑣 2, 𝑣 3, 𝑣 4 }. 𝑊 𝑃 1 (𝑡 ) has two ran-domly selected neighbors of each 𝑣 𝑖 . In the example, 𝑤 1, 𝑤 2

are selected from 𝑣 1, 𝑤 3, 𝑤 4 are selected from 𝑣 2, and so on. Node 𝑣 1 ends up with three neighbors in 𝑊 𝑃 1 (𝑡 ), because an additional neighbor ( 𝑤 8) was selected via 𝑣 4. The neigh-bors of 𝑣 𝑖 that are not selected in 𝑊 𝑃 1 (𝑡 ) drop into the rings, along with neighbors of 𝑊 𝑃 1 (𝑡 ).The levels control traffic flow between any source 𝑠 to 𝑡 .The first step is spraying , where 𝑠 forwards to a randomly chosen neighbor (i.e., ECMP). Spraying is independent of       

> 𝑡
> 𝑣 1
> 𝑣 2
> 𝑣 3
> 𝑣 4
> 𝑤 1
> 𝑤 2
> 𝑤 3
> 𝑤 4
> 𝑤 5𝑤 6
> 𝑤 7
> 𝑤 8
> 𝑟 1
> 𝑟 2
> 𝑟 3
> 𝑟 4
> 𝑟 5
> 𝑟 6
> 𝑟 7𝑟 8
> 𝑟 9
> 𝑟 10
> 𝑟 11
> 𝑟 12
> 𝑟 13
> 𝑟 14
> 𝑟 15
> 𝑜 1
> 𝑜 2
> 𝑜 3
> 𝑣 𝑖 𝑊 𝑃 0(𝑡 )
> 𝑤 𝑖 𝑊 𝑃 1(𝑡 )
> 𝑟 𝑖 𝐼𝑅 (𝑡 )
> 𝑜 𝑖 𝑂𝑅 (𝑡 )

Figure 3: Example graph with Spraypoint levels for 𝑡 .

𝑡 and happens even if 𝑠 and 𝑡 are adjacent. 4 Post spraying, each intermediate node 𝑢 follows the "pointing" rules. (1) If 𝑢 ∈ 𝑊 𝑃 0 (𝑡 ), forward to 𝑡 .(2) If 𝑢 ∈ 𝑊 𝑃 𝑙 ∈ [ 1,ℓ ] (𝑡 ), forward (ECMP) to one of ℎ neigh-bors randomly selected from 𝑊 𝑃 𝑙 −1 (𝑡 ).(3) If 𝑢 ∈ 𝐼𝑅 (𝑡 ), forward to one of ℎ neighbors randomly selected from 𝑊 𝑃 ℓ (𝑡 ).(4) If 𝑢 ∈ 𝑂𝑅 (𝑡 ), forward to one of ℎ neighbors randomly selected from those with shortest paths to 𝐼𝑅 (𝑡 ) nodes. Let us see Spraypoint forwarding in action for a packet from 𝑣 2 to 𝑡 in Figure 3. Assume ℎ = 1. First, 𝑣 2 sprays to one of 𝑡 , 𝑤 3, 𝑤 4, or 𝑜 1. If the packet is sent to 𝑡 , its journey is complete. If it is sent to 𝑤 3 or 𝑤 4, it will go back to 𝑣 2 per the second rule above, and then to 𝑡 . Spraying happens only at the source; if a packet happens to return to the source, it follows the pointing rules. If the packet was sprayed to 𝑜 1, it reaches 𝑡 via 𝑟 6, 𝑤 5, and 𝑣 3.

Why spraying . Spraying exploits the expansion property to generate many paths between source-destination pairs. In general, there may be only a few shortest paths from a source 𝑠 to a destination 𝑡 . But in an expander, there are many edge disjoint short paths between all pairs. A simple heuristic to use these paths is to follow shortest paths to 𝑡 

from all neighbors of 𝑠 . Spraying implements this heuristic. 

Why waypoints . Spraying alone fails in some cases. Sup-pose 𝑠 is a neighbor of 𝑡 . After 𝑠 sprays, its neighbors use shortest paths to 𝑡 . Unfortunately, unless a neighbor is di-rectly connected to 𝑡 , which will be rare in a large graph, the shortest paths go via 𝑠 . So almost all neighbors route the traffic back to 𝑠 , and the 𝑠 →𝑡 link will congest. Higher-level 

> 4Spraying is reminiscent of Valiant Load Balancing [ 47 ]. But unlike VLB, which uses arbitrary nodes as intermediaries, it uses only neighboring nodes. Its primary goal is high fan-out at the source, not load balancing, though high fan-out does aid load balancing. 4

waypoints ( 𝑊 𝑃 𝑙 ∈ [ 1,ℓ ] (𝑡 )) draw out traffic further, prevent-ing a collapse on this link. Further, selecting 𝑝 of 𝑑 nodes builds a 𝑝 -ary forwarding graph rooted at each neighbor of 𝑡 ,which helps spread traffic across all neighbors (high fan-in). Otherwise, some neighbors may not be used. 

Setting ℓ. To achieve the goals of spraying and waypointing, we set ℓ=max (1, ⌈log 𝑝 (𝑛 /2𝑑 2)⌉) . The size of the set 𝑊 𝑃 ℓ (𝑡 ) ∪ 

𝐼𝑅 (𝑡 ) will be at least 𝑛 /2 for this choice of ℓ (§7), which re-duces path lengths because each node in 𝑂𝑅 (𝑡 ) will connect directly to this set with high probability. 

Path length variability . Like other proposals for routing in expander graphs [ 21 , 42 , 46 ], Spraypoint computes paths of different lengths between a pair of endpoints. This vari-ability will not impact single-path transport protocols like TCP which sample only one path (based on ECMP), but it could confuse multipath protocols [ 39 , 41 , 54 ] that spread traffic across multiple paths (by varying packet headers used by ECMP) if they use latency differential as a congestion or load balancing signal. In a datacenter that spans 300 me-ters and uses 100 Gbps links, a 2-hop path length difference creates a maximum latency difference of 4.4 𝜇𝑠 (0.7 𝜇𝑠 trans-mission time for a 9 KB packet, 1.5 𝜇𝑠 propagation delay per hop). This differential is low compared to endhost latencies and a small amount of queuing (6 packets) will wipe it out. Benchmarking on production fabrics confirms the absence of performance issues for multipath protocols (§8). 

Distributed implementation . Spraypoint permits a fully distributed implementation as a link-state protocol, where every node has a full view of the topology. Nodes can com-pute levels for each destination and then compute local next hops by applying the pointing rules. All nodes make identical waypoint selections, via deterministic hashing of a shared key, ensuring that all pointing graphs are loop free. We implement spraying using VRFs (virtual routing and forwarding), which enable different routing logic for different interfaces. Unlike prior work that uses VRFs to create non-shortest paths [ 21 ] (which does not scale), we need only two VRFs. All server-facing interfaces of a router use a VRF that sprays incoming traffic to all fabric-facing interfaces. (One exception is traffic destined to servers connected to the same router, which is forwarded directly to those servers.) All fabric-facing interfaces use a second VRF that follows the pointing rules. This setup allows a packet to revisit its source (at most once) without looping indefinitely. 

Resource requirements . Spraypoint uses two types of router memory. The first is longest-prefix matching (LPM) memory, which maps the destination address of an incoming dr r-ports  

> frFPs each

. . . .   

> dcc-ports
> fcFPs each

Figure 4: A ShuffleBox. 

packet to an ECMP group id. LPM memory use depends on the number of network prefixes and is similar to fat trees. 5

The second type of memory is to map ECMP group id to next hop set. Its required size depends on how ECMP groups are setup. The two possibilities are: (1) a separate ECMP group for each destination node, which consumes 𝑂 (𝑛ℎ )

memory; and (2) pre-define all possible 𝑑 ℎ groups and use the corresponding one for each destination, which consumes 

𝑂 (ℎ𝑑 ℎ ) memory. Based on 𝑛 and 𝑑 , we pick the method that supports the larger ℎ while fitting in the memory. For 128-port switches, the value of 𝑑 is around 64, so a minimum of 

ℎ=2 is always feasible independent of fabric size ( ℎ𝑑 ℎ ≈ 8𝐾 ).The computational complexity of Spraypoint is 𝑂 (𝑛 2𝑑 ) per node because each node inspects 𝑛𝑑 edges per destination to compute levels. The CPUs of modern commodity switches can handle such complexity [ 26 ]. For comparison, the com-plexity of k-shortest-paths routing is 𝑂 (𝑘𝑛 2 (𝑑 + log 𝑛 )) [ 51 ]. 

## 6 CABLING RANDOM GRAPHS 

We explain how logically random graphs are realized in RNG 

after a brief background on datacenter cabling. 

Datacenter cabling . Datacenter space is typically parti-tioned into O(10) rooms (not necessarily with dividing walls). Each room hosts some number of racks. Before server racks land, the room is prepared by installing power, cooling, and basic cabling infrastructure including patch panels and inter-room trunk cables. When server racks land, additional cables are installed to connect them. The cost and complexity of cabling stems from three main factors: (1) the number of connectors and endpoint pairs, where a patch panel is an endpoint and so is a ToR; (2) the length of cables and the fraction that are intra- versus inter-room—inter-room cabling is more expensive because it needs extra infrastructure; and (3) the amount of cabling that can be done during room preparation versus when racks land—later cabling is riskier and slower. 

Physical connectivity in RNG . We build a random graph using ShuffleBoxes (Figure 4). Each ShuffleBox has 𝑑 𝑟 r-ports 

that connect to routers and 𝑑 𝑐 c-ports that connect to other 

> 5An exception is when hierarchy is leveraged to aggregate some prefixes. Such aggregation is not feasible in flat expanders. Because LPM memory is huge, it can support even the largest Amazon DCs without aggregation. 5

Figure 5: Cabling in a datacenter with three rooms. Routers connect to r-ports of ShuffleBoxes in the room, and ShuffleBoxes inter-connect via c-ports. 

ShuffleBoxes. R-ports and c-ports terminate, respectively, 𝑓 𝑟 

and 𝑓 𝑐 fiber pairs (FPs) each. An FP enables duplex commu-nication between routers. ShuffleBoxes connect FPs between r-ports and c-ports ( 𝑑 𝑟 ×𝑓 𝑟 =𝑑 𝑐 ×𝑓 𝑐 ). We describe these param-eter values later. To connect routers via ShuffleBox, we deploy a set of Shuf-fleBox, called a shuffle panel , in each room (Figure 5). Router uplinks connect to randomly selected r-ports in the panel. The c-ports of panels in different rooms are also randomly connected. If there are 𝑅 panels, each with 𝐶 ShuffleBoxes, we connect approximately (𝑅 −1)𝐶𝑑 𝑐  

> 𝑅

c-ports of each panel to other panels, essentially building a random graph between panels. Unconnected c-ports of a panel have a ShuffleBack , a special connector that bridges pairs of FPs coming into the c-port (from r-ports). It bridges FP1 to FP2, FP3 to FP4, and so on. Panel r-ports that are not connected to routers also have a ShuffleBack that bridges c-port FP pairs. Routers con-nect only to the ShuffleBoxes (never directly), and topology modifications are achieved by changing only connections between the ShuffleBoxes (as explained below). Figure 6 shows three ways in which two routers can logi-cally connect: (a) routers in the same room connect to the same ShuffleBoxe and their FPs are shuffled to a c-port with a ShuffleBack; 6 (b) routers in different rooms whose FPs are shuffled to connected c-ports; (c) routers whose FPs end up at the same ShuffleBacked r-port in another room. In the final pattern, the two ToRs may be in the same room. Connecting via ShuffleBoxes has higher optical loss than direct connectivity, but this loss is within the margins of commodity transceivers. Our construction can produce even longer end-to-end paths, e.g., if the right r-port in Figure 6c had a ShuffleBack instead of connecting to a router, the path will extend and go back out via a c-port. We disable paths with over seven connectors to maintain optical signal quality. The logical graph built using our connectivity approach is an optimal expander, despite c-port connections getting  

> 6With random mapping of router uplinks to ShuffleBox r-ports, there is a chance that two uplinks of the same router land on the same ShuffleBox and are bridged via a c-port ShuffleBack. For realistic router counts, the probability of self-edges is negligible since each ShuffleBox is small. (a) (b)
> (c)

Figure 6: Physical connectivity patterns that enable logical connectivity. The hats denote ShuffleBacks. 

correlated by bundling edges between multiple router pairs. Because each bundle has random routers and c-port connec-tions are random, our analysis confirms that RNG topologies have the same spectral gap [ 50 ], a measure of expansion, as unconstrained random graphs. 

Incrementally deploying rooms and racks . RNG ’s phys-ical connectivity can be done incrementally. §A describes the process. To summarize the key steps: (1) install a new shuffle panel when a new room is prepared; (2) if it is not the first room, rebalance inter-panel connectivity by removing some existing (randomly selected) c-port connections and ShuffleBacks and using the opened c-ports to connect to the new panel; and (3) when racks land in the room, connect router uplinks to randomly selected r-ports. 

ShuffleBox configuration . We use 𝑓 𝑟 =4, the number of breakout lanes for a 400 Gbps physical port. So that each FP coming into an r-port from a router can reach different places via different c-ports, 𝑑 𝑐 =𝑓 𝑟 =4. We use 𝑓 𝑐 =32 to balance availability of commodity connectors (larger values are less common) and effort to rebalance inter-panel connectivity (small values increase effort). Finally, since 𝑑 𝑟 ×𝑓 𝑟 =𝑑 𝑐 ×𝑓 𝑐 , we get 𝑑 𝑟 =32 . With this configuration, the shuffling pattern of ShuffleBoxes is simple: each c-port FP goes to a different r-port, and each r-port FP goes to a different c-port (full bipartite). 

Cabling complexity . RNG ’s cabling has low complexity per the three factors outlined earlier. With 𝑛 routers and 𝑅 

rooms, the number of physically-connected endpoint pairs is 𝑛 + 𝑅 (𝑅 −1) 

> 2

as opposed to 𝑛 2 logically-connected pairs. We count each shuffle panel as one endpoint because after the trunk cables reach the panel, the intra-panel distribution is simple. Inter-room cables are limited to 𝑅 (𝑅 −1) 

> 2

trunks between shuffle panels. Other than router to r-port connec-tivity, all cabling can be done before racks land. Along these factors, cabling complexity of RNG is on par with fat trees. Rebalancing inter-panel connectivity is a unique activity in 

RNG , but it is needed only a small number of times, when new rooms are prepared. 

> 6

Cost . ShuffleBoxes and ShuffleBacks are novel passive optical components that RNG uses to simplify cabling. Being passive, their cost is low relative to switches and transceivers and similar to traditional patch panels [ 12 ] and loopbacks [ 13 ]that are often used to simplify fat tree cabling. 

## 7 MODELING PERFORMANCE 

The combination of random graphs and spraying-induced decorrelation enables modeling of RNG ’s performance. Our models inevitably make simplifying assumptions but predict performance quite accurately (§9). We summarize the key results in this section and include details in the appendix. Our models give approximate formulas that give accurate predictions of the actual quantities. For convenience, we do not give formal statements here, and defer all precise mathematical statements and proofs to the appendix. We consider operating regimes in which (𝑖 ) 2(ln (𝑛 ) + 5) ≤ 

𝑑 ≪ 𝑛 , (𝑖𝑖 ) 𝑝 ≥ ( 𝑛 /𝑑 2)1/ℓ , and (𝑖𝑖𝑖 ) ℎ ≪ 𝑑 , where ℓ is the number of waypoint levels in Spraypoint. (We used the sec-ond criterion in §5 for setting ℓ). Performance is predictable in this regime because distributional tails due to randomness are trimmed. At the same time, this regime is broad. Since commodity switches support at least 128 breakout lanes [ 5 , 6 ], we can easily pick values of 𝑑 that exceed the stated lower bound ( ≈ 28 for 𝑛 =10K) for even large fabrics, and we can pick compliant values of 𝑝 and ℎ . Further, ℓ=1 suffices for 

𝑛 =10K and typical values of 𝑑 and 𝑝 . Our oversubscription model focuses on that regime for simplicity. 

## 7.1 Edge disjoint paths 

Spraypoint exploits the expansion property to compute many edge disjoint paths. The formal statement and proof are given in §F. 

Model 7.1. With high probability, the number of edge-disjoint paths between 𝑠 and 𝑡 are approximated by: 

(

𝑑 (1 − exp (− ℎ)) if 𝑠 ∉ 𝑊 𝑃 0 (𝑡 )

min [𝑑 − 𝑝, 𝑑 (1 − exp (−( 1 − 𝑝 /𝑑 )ℎ))] if 𝑠 ∈ 𝑊 𝑃 0 (𝑡 )

A detailed explanation of this model is in §F, but we sum-marize here. Consider 𝑠 ∉ 𝑊 𝑃 0 (𝑡 ) (i.e., s is not a neighbor of 𝑡 ), and spraying a single packet to every neighbor of 𝑠 .The number of edge disjoint paths is closely related to the number of neighbors of 𝑡 reached by these packets. Modeling this process as a balls and bins calculation [ 49 ], where each ball is thrown ℎ times, leads to the formula above. When 𝑠 ∈ 𝑊 𝑃 0 (𝑡 ), 𝑝 neighbors of 𝑠 are in 𝑊 𝑃 1 (𝑡 ). When traffic is sprayed by 𝑠 , the traffic to these waypoints poten-tially comes back to 𝑠 . For the other 𝑑 − 𝑝 neighbors, we get a version of the balls and bins game. 

Takeaways . (1) For both types of sources, the reduction in the number of edge disjoint paths compared to the maximum 0 1 2 3 4 5

> Path length
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> CDF over paths
> RNG, p=2
> Model, p=2
> RNG, p=16
> Model, p=16

Figure 7: Path length distribution. 

possible value of 𝑑 is proportional to exp (− ℎ). Thus, a low value of ℎ > 1 suffices for good performance. The change in 

exp (− ℎ) from ℎ=1 (0.37) to ℎ=2 (0.13) is large, but it tapers off rapidly as ℎ increases. (2) For neighboring sources, high values of 𝑝 reduce the number of edge disjoint paths. 

## 7.2 Path length 

Path lengths in RNG depend on the sizes of various Spray-point levels. A packet is sprayed to a random node, and the number of pointing hops depends on the node’s level. We can bound the resulting path length distribution. 

Model 7.2. With high probability, the fraction of paths of length 𝑖 is approximated by: 



1/𝑛 𝑖 = 1

𝑝 𝑖 −2𝑑 /𝑛 2 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ ℓ + 2exp (− 𝑝 ℓ𝑑 2/𝑛 ) 𝑖 = ℓ + 4

rest 𝑖 = ℓ + 3

§E has the proof, but Figure 7 compares the model to a simulated fabric. It considers two values of 𝑝 , with 𝑛 =1K and 

𝑑 =64. The model matches the simulation well, especially for 

𝑝 = 2. When 𝑝𝑑 > 𝑛 , as for 𝑝 =16, lower-order terms that determine level sizes begin to matter. We ignore them for simplicity, but our analysis can be extended if needed. 

Takeaways . (1) When ℓ = 1 (practical regime), the maximum path length is 5, and 5-hop paths are a negligible fraction (e.g., exp (− 𝑝𝑑 2/𝑛 ) ≈ 0.0003 for 𝑛 =1K, 𝑑 =64, 𝑝 =2). (2) In this regime, the average path length of RNG is less than that of 3-tier fat trees, where the vast majority of ToR-to-ToR paths have 4 hops. (3) RNG paths have variable lengths even across the same endpoint pair, unlike fat trees where all paths between two endpoints are equal. (4) ℎ does not impact path length. 

> 7

## 7.3 Throughput (oversubscription ratio) 

A key measure of a network’s throughput is oversubscrip-tion ratio. It is the minimum fraction of traffic that the net-work can deliver, without exceeding link capacities, across all possible traffic matrices. Unlike for fat trees, one cannot determine oversubscription for expander topologies through a simple analysis of the graph structure. Our oversubscription model uses two observations. First, the worst case traffic matrix is a matching where every node sends at full rate to exactly one other node and re-ceives at full rate from exactly one other (possibly different) node [ 34 ]. We consider a matching with randomly selected source-destination pairs, which can be viewed as modeling 

stochastic oversubscription. This random traffic matrix might not be the worst case. While matchings with long paths can help find worse traffic matrices [ 22 , 25 ], spraying in RNG 

decorrelates path lengths. The stochastic analysis is common in random graph theory— argue that worst case for graph properties (e.g., cuts, expan-sion, matchings) is close to the random case, using a union bound argument [ 11 , 31 ]. Second, the network throughput is maximized for a given traffic matrix, or the oversubscription ratio is minimized, when traffic takes the shortest possible paths (Lemma G.2). We estimate oversubscription by estimating 𝜇 𝑖 for each flow in a random matching, where 𝜇 𝑖 is the maximum frac-tion of flow carried by 𝑖 -hop paths. The details are in §G.2; we summarize below. We consider 𝑖 ∈ [ 2, 5] because the probability of length 1 paths is negligible and the maximum path length is 5 when 

ℓ = 1 (practical regime). We approximate 𝜇 2 as 𝑑 /𝑛 because each flow has 𝑑 /𝑛 fraction of 2-hop paths (Model 7.2). With an assumption that paths do not overlap, we can show that almost every such path carries a single unit of flow. Estimating 𝜇 3 is more challenging because we cannot as-sume that paths do not overlap. We first estimate 𝜙 3, the fraction of a source 𝑠 ’s capacity along 3-hop paths after re-moving the 𝑑 /𝑛 edges used by 2-hop paths, using the facts that 3-hop paths are of the form 𝑠 → 𝑊 𝑃 1 (𝑡 ) → 𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ) → 𝑡 

and there are 𝑝𝑑 waypoints. We then estimate 𝜅 3, the amount of source-destination flow that such a path can carry, using the distribution of path overlaps. 

𝜙 3 = min (𝑝𝑑 /𝑛, 1 − 𝑑 /𝑛 ) · ( 1 − 𝑑 /𝑛 ) · ( 1 − ( 4𝑑 /𝑛 )ℎ )

𝜅 3 = (1 − 𝜙 3)6/2 + ( 1 − 𝜙 23 )3/6 + 1/3

After similar polynomial calculations for 𝜇 4, 𝜇 5, we get: 

Model 7.3. The oversubscription ratio is approximated by 

(𝜇 2 + 𝜇 3 + 𝜇 4 + 𝜇 5)−1.

𝜇 2 = 𝑑 /𝑛 𝜇 3 = 𝜙 3𝜅 3 (see above) 

𝜇 4 = [1 − ( 𝑝 + 1)𝑑 /𝑛 − exp (− 𝑝𝑑 2/𝑛 )] ·



1 − [ 1 − ( 1 − 2𝑑 /𝑛 )( 1 − ( 4𝑑 /𝑛 )ℎ )] ℎ 

·( 1 − 𝜇 2 − 2𝜇 3)/ 4

𝜇 5 = exp (− 𝑝𝑑 2/𝑛 )( 1 − 𝜇 2 − 2𝜇 3 − 3𝜇 4)/ 5

This model characterizes the mesh-layer (between routers) oversubscription. For an end-to-end (server-to-server) analy-sis, oversubscription at the ToRs must also be factored (§7.4). 

Takeaways . Fabric oversubscription is a complex interplay of all parameters. By capturing it for a wide range of pa-rameter values, 7 our model enables fabric design for specific performance targets, which we discuss next. 

## 7.4 Designing fabrics 

While the exact procedure for determining the topology and routing parameters ( 𝑛 , 𝑑 , 𝑝 , and ℎ) depends on desired trade-offs (e.g., between oversubscription and path length), we illustrate for a common target: minimize cost (fewest ToRs) of connecting 𝑠 servers with an end-to-end oversubscrip-tion ratio below 𝑟 𝑒 and ToR-layer oversubscription below 𝑟 𝑡 

(1≤𝑟 𝑡 ≤𝑟 𝑒 ). Since ToRs are a localized congestion risk, opera-tors usually want to control their oversubscription [37]. To meet the target above, we binary search for the minimal viable value of 𝑑 such that 𝑑 ≥ ⌈ 𝑃 𝑟 𝑡 +1 ⌉, 𝑑 ≥ 2𝑙𝑛 (⌈ 𝑠 𝑃 −𝑑 ⌉) + 5),and 𝑑 < 𝑃 , where 𝑃 is the number of router ports. The first constraint ensures that ToR layer oversubscription, which is 𝑃 −𝑑 𝑑 :1, is below 𝑟 𝑡 ; the second ensures that the design is within the modeled operating regime; and the third ensures that at least one port is available for servers. Minimizing 𝑑 

subject to these constraints minimizes ToR count because it maximizes 𝑃 -𝑑 , the ports that connect to servers. The viability of a value of 𝑑 is determined as follows. Based on 𝑑 , we compute the number of required ToRs 𝑛 as ⌈ 𝑠 𝑃 −𝑑 ⌉.We then determine the maximum value of ℎ that ToRs can support based on 𝑛 , 𝑑 , and the ECMP memory size (§5). For a given 𝑑 , 𝑛 , and ℎ, the valid range of 𝑝 is [𝑛 /𝑑 2, 𝑑 ], and different values yield different oversubscription ratios. We compute the range of oversubscription ratios using Model 7.3 for extreme values of 𝑝 , and deem 𝑑 as viable if 𝑟 𝑒 /𝑟 𝑡 , which is the desired mesh-layer oversubscription, falls in this range. Once we have the minimal viable 𝑑 , and corresponding 𝑛 ,

ℎ, we use the maximum 𝑝 ∈ [ 𝑛 /𝑑 2, 𝑑 ] with oversubscription less than 𝑟 𝑒 /𝑟 𝑡 . Maximizing 𝑝 minimizes oversubscription.       

> 7The formulas can be simplified for specific regimes, e.g., when a parameter is fixed. For ℎ=2, log 𝑑 (𝑛 /𝑝 ) + 2approximates Model 7.3 well. 8

Figure 8: (a) One of the racks hosting the emulated ShuffleBoxes. (b) Rows of emulated ShuffleBoxes. (c) A ShuffleBack dongle with 4-FPs MPO connector. 

## 8 PRODUCTION FABRICS 

We have deployed the RNG design in two fabrics that carry production workloads. The first, called the "server mesh", connects ToRs as an expander. The second, called the "edge mesh," connects to the server mesh and to remote datacenters, and it provides transit between these networks. Ports that interconnect the two RNG fabrics are spread across their routers. We build separate fabrics because they have different oversubscription targets. The edge mesh is non-blocking and server mesh has the same oversubscription ratio as Amazon’s latest fat tree fabrics. We elide the oversubscription level and mesh sizes for confidentiality. At the time of deploying these fabrics, we did not have manufactured ShuffleBoxes. We emulated shuffling with a traditional patch panel that bridges individual FPs and cus-tom ShuffleBacks. See Figure 8. 

Spraypoint performance . We implemented Spraypoint by extending Amazon’s shortest-paths based link-state protocol. We reused the topology dissemination component and mod-ified next hop computation. For similarly-sized topologies, Spraypoint performs similarly to the current protocol along key metrics such as convergence time after a failure. 

Cabling experience . Cabling RNG using the scheme in §6 was relatively smooth. One challenge was ensuring enough ShuffleBoxes are installed in each room. The exact number of racks, and thus router uplinks, that can land in a room varies, depending on their power consumption. We used an estimated upper bound on the number of router uplinks per room. 8

Due to a lack of structure and physically identifiable pat-terns, a concern with random graphs has been operators connecting ports not intended to be connected [ 42 , 46 ]. The incidence of such miscabling in RNG was below 1.5%. 

Operational challenges . We give a short preview of these challenges, even though it is not a focus of this paper. Oper-ationalizing random graphs required upgrading many soft-ware tools that manage Amazon’s networks. The hierarchy of fat trees was embedded deeply into these tools, starting from device names itself to managing redundancy during maintenance. For instance, ToRs in fat trees do not rely on each other and can be upgraded based on concerns local to the rack, but in RNG we need to account for inter-ToR depen-dencies and cannot simultaneously upgrade too many neigh-bors of any given ToR. We ensured that fault localization functions properly and built new tools to easily determine the paths between ToRs for troubleshooting. 

Application performance . A majority of traffic in hyper-scale datacenters is moving toward multipath transport pro-tocols [ 39 , 41 , 54 ]. The sender splits data across tens of "flowlets" that use different paths in the network (based on flowlet hash). The receiver assembles and orders the data, transparent to the applications. The sender uses latency as one of the signals when picking which flowlet to use. Our main benchmarking goal is to validate that latency dif-ferential across sender-receiver paths (§7.2) does not impact performance. We study this by observing the raw throughput of the transport protocol and the performance of a latency-and throughput-sensitive block-storage application that uses the protocol. We compare RNG against a production fat tree fabric with identical oversubscription and identical server specs. We normalized results by the mean values observed for the fat tree to preserve confidentiality. Figure 9 shows the throughput distribution based on an experiment with 127 concurrent flows with infinite demand between pairs of random servers. The results are identical for RNG and fat tree. Any differences in path latencies of the two networks are immaterial for application performance. Figure 10 (left) compares the packets per second (PPS) for small, 64-byte packets between pairs of servers. RNG is slightly higher because it has less background traffic. Fig-ure 10 (right) shows I/O operations per second (IOPS) for storage reads from clients to multiple servers. RNG ’s perfor-mance matches fat trees for this workload as well.      

> 8If this bound were breached, we plan to treat the remaining racks as belong-ing to a new logical room and perform the room-addition activity. Analogous provisioning challenges arise also for fat trees in large datacenters. 90.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.0 2.5
> Normalized flow throughput (Gbps)
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> CDF over flows
> Fat tree
> RNG

Figure 9: Per-flow throughput of multipath transport (normalized by the fat tree mean). RNG Fat tree  

> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> Normalized PPS
> RNG Fat tree
> 0.0
> 0.5
> 1.0
> 1.5
> 2.0
> Normalized read IOPS

Figure 10: PPS of 64B packets (left) and IOPS of storage reads (right). The error bars are standard deviations. 

These benchmarks, and the absence of user-reported per-formance issues, confirm that RNG matches fat tree perfor-mance (at lower cost and higher fault tolerance). 

## 9 BROADER EVALUATION 

Production fabric benchmarks can validate the performance of real applications but we need simulations to evaluate a broad range of design parameters and workloads. We bench-mark RNG ’s oversubscription ratio and the number of edge disjoint paths that Spraypoint produces. We also compare its throughput and cost relative to fat trees. 

## 9.1 Oversubscription 

Oversubscription ratio characterizes worst-case throughput of a network and helps quantify congestion risk. Namyar et al. [ 34 ] prove that worst-case throughput occurs for a per-fect unidirectional matching, where each node sends at full rate to its counterpart. The authors do not suggest a way to generate the worst matching among the many choices. We randomly generate 100 matchings and estimate oversub-scription using the worst value, though we will see that the distribution is narrow because the topology and routing are random [ 11 , 31 ]. Similar to our oversubscription model, this process characterizes stochastic oversubscription. For a given matching, the oversubscription ratio is 𝑟 if each transmitter can send at least 1/𝑟 fraction of its full rate without congesting any link. This measure is determined by the smallest blocked flow, irrespective of whether others can send more. We compute 𝑟 by solving a linear program (LP) that encodes a multi-commodity flow problem [ 53 ]. Traffic for each flow is spread across Spraypoint paths, and the LP minimizes 𝑟 under link capacity constraints. These LPs are huge and each takes multiple hours to solve, which limits the largest fabrics we can practically study. Figure 11 shows the results of simulations (" RNG ") and our model (§7.3). The line denotes the minimum value of 

𝑟 for each setting. There is a shadow for the max but it is barely visible because the variance is near zero. To study a broad range of settings, we vary one parameter while the others are set to default values ( 𝑛 =1000, 𝑑 =64, 𝑝 =4, ℎ=2). This default can support 64K servers with 100 Gbps uplinks and offers an oversubscription ratio of 3.25. We see that the oversubscription ratio changes gracefully as we vary the parameters, highlighting the ability of random graphs to support fine-grained oversubscription levels. We also see that the impact of ℎ and 𝑝 flattens out beyond a point. The model matches empirical results well, enabling perfor-mance predictability. It allows operators to plan RNG fabrics like they plan fat trees today, with the added advantage of lower cost, higher fault tolerance, and finer-grained per-formance tuning. Some settings in Figure 11 are technically outside the modeled regime, e.g., 𝑑 = 20 ≱ 2(ln (𝑛 = 1𝐾 ) + 5).We have defined the regime conservatively to get high prob-ability results, and the models degrade gracefully outside the regime. 

## 9.2 Edge disjoint paths 

Spraypoint aims to find many edge disjoint paths. We eval-uate this ability by computing the min cut across paths be-tween endpoint pairs, which equals the number of edge disjoint paths [ 52 ]. Figure 12 shows the CDF of min cut across endpoint pairs for the same default fabric parameters as above ( 𝑛 =1000, 𝑑 =64, 𝑝 =4, ℎ=2). For comparison, it also shows 𝑘 -shortest-path routing (which is not implementable at scale with commodity switches). We consider 𝑘 =8 [ 42 , 46 ]and 𝑘 =64, a high value that equals the node degree (and needs 8x more resources). For almost all endpoint pairs, Spraypoint finds over 50 edge disjoint paths. For half the pairs, it finds over 60 such paths out of the maximum possible 64. In contrast, the me-dian for 8-shortest-paths is 5 and for 64-shortest paths is 35. This difference impacts oversubscription directly. The oversubscription for the two k-shortest-paths configurations are 21.3 and 4.7, while that for Spraypoint is 3.25. Spraypoint is easier to implement and finds a greater diversity of paths.                    

> 10 1000 2000 3000 4000
> Value of n
> 2.5
> 3.0
> 3.5
> 4.0
> 4.5
> Oversubscription ratio 16 32 48 64 80 96
> Value of d
> 2.5
> 3.0
> 3.5
> 4.0
> 4.5 0816 24 32
> Value of p
> 2.5
> 3.0
> 3.5
> 4.0
> 4.5 04812 16
> Value of h
> 2.5
> 3.0
> 3.5
> 4.0
> 4.5
> RNG
> Model

Figure 11: Oversubscription for different topology parameters. The defaults are 𝑛 =1000, 𝑑 =64, 𝑝 =4, ℎ=2. 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 

> # of edge disjoint paths
> 0.00
> 0.25
> 0.50
> 0.75
> 1.00
> CDF over
> endpoint pairs
> 8-shortest
> 64-shortest
> Spraypoint

Figure 12: Edge disjoint path count. 

It offers higher peak throughput between endpoint pairs, and offers higher network-wide throughput. 

## 9.3 Throughput relative to fat trees 

Beyond worst-case traffic patterns that help characterize oversubscription, operators want to also validate perfor-mance for other traffic patterns. This validation is hard be-cause there are many possible traffic patterns. Our evaluation is based on the observation that any traffic pattern may be viewed as a combination of three basic types, and we can get insight into the performance of RNG for a range of traffic patterns by studying these types. The three types are: 

• Clique: A group of nodes exchanges traffic amongst themselves (e.g., collective communication like all-reduce, replication traffic among storage servers). 

• Hubs: Some nodes (e.g., Web or storage servers) send to and receive from all other nodes. 

• Matchings: Nodes send all traffic to exactly one other node, as we studied earlier. The nodes in the traffic patterns are ToRs, not individual servers, because that stresses the fabric more [34]. Each pattern type is parameterized by active fraction 𝑓 ∈[0, 1] to capture the skew. Clique( 𝑓 =0.2) means that the clique size is 20% of the nodes (randomly selected); hubs( 𝑓 =0.2) means that 20% of the nodes in the network are hubs; and matchings( 𝑓 =0.2) means that 20% of the nodes are involved in the matching. For each pattern type and 𝑓 , all flows in the traffic matrix (between a sender-receiver pair) are equal and sum of rows and columns equal the local capacity of nodes. Thus, each matrix is routable in a non-blocking fabric. For each value of 𝑓 , we generated 100 random traffic matri-ces. We quantify performance for a matrix using the fraction 

𝑟 as before—the network can carry at least 1/𝑟 fraction of each flow. Thus, we are computing the oversubscription ratio of each matrix, instead of worst-case oversubscription ratio. Figure 13 shows the results for RNG and fat tree. The lines denote the mean and the shaded area denotes the min and max. Both topologies are designed to support 61.4K servers across 960 ToRs, with a worst-case oversubscription of 3:1. In this configuration, RNG uses 45% fewer switches. We see that RNG performs better by as much as 30% across a wide regime for clique and hubs. The exceptions are cases with 𝑓 <0.1, where fat tree is 5-10% better. For these cases, shortest path routing on fat trees finds edge disjoint paths that equal the ToR degree. The equivalent number is 10% lower in RNG for ℎ=2 (see §9.2). The number of edge disjoint paths matters most when there are few senders in the net-work. For matchings, fat tree is better when 𝑓 <0.4 and RNG 

is better otherwise. Amazon operators prefer the broadly better performance of RNG , especially given its lower cost and higher fault tolerance. The regimes with low values of 𝑓 , where fat tree performs better, are acceptable because they will materialize only when all servers in the rack act in unison, a rarity for multi-tenant datacenters. 

## 9.4 Cost relative to fat trees 

Prior works report a range of values on the cost of expander topologies relative to fat trees. These values are difficult to compare because they use different performance measures and network sizes. It is also difficult to get a holistic view because of their experimental methodology. Our models en-able systematic analysis of the relative cost as a function of oversubscription ratios and network sizes.                   

> 11 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Active fraction ( f)
> 0
> 1
> 2
> 3
> 4
> Oversubscription ratio  Traffic pattern: clique
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Active fraction ( f)
> Traffic pattern: hubs
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
> Active fraction ( f)
> Traffic pattern: matchings
> Fat tree
> RNG

Figure 13: Oversubscription ratio (lower is better) for different traffic matrices. Both fat tree and RNG topologies are configured for worst-case oversubscription ratio of 3:1. RNG topologies use 45% fewer switches. 2048 4096 8192   

> Num. servers
> 0
> 10
> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> Reduction (%)
> 32 ports
> 131K 262K 524K
> Num. servers
> 128 ports
> Oversub.
> 1:1
> 2:1
> 3:1
> 7:1
> 15:1

Figure 14: Reduction in number of switches in RNG 

relative to a 3-tier fat tree for two different port counts. 

We use the ratio of the number of switches used by the two topologies as the measure of relative cost. This measure automatically includes transceivers, whose count is propor-tional to switch count. It ignores passive optical components like cables, connectors, and patch panels; the cost of these components is in the minority and varies based on specific cabling methods (e.g., if cables are trunked) in the datacenter. Switch count is a general, reproducible measure. We compute the number of switches needed for RNG 

using the procedure in §7.4 and compare it to generalized 3-tier fat tree with the same oversubscription level. ToRs are not oversubscribed in either RNG or fat trees. Figure 14 shows the results for different oversubscription levels and two possible values of switch port counts. The highest server count for each port count is the maximum supported by a non-blocking fat tree [ 33 ], and the other two are 50% and 25% of the servers. Oversubscription of 2:1 cannot be precisely supported in fat trees with 32 or 128 port switches, but we assume each port is 3-way splittable for this experiment. The cost reduction varies by 5x, between 9 and 45%. It has a similar pattern across port counts and network sizes, and oversubscription ratio is the key determiner. The reduction is low for the 1:1 oversub case because non-blocking fat trees do not strand capacity; the reduction here primarily comes from shorter paths in RNG . After increasing from oversubscription of 1:1 to 3:1, the cost advantage starts decreasing slowly. For high oversubscription, a fat tree has fewer switches at the aggregation and spine tiers, which lowers the potential of reducing cost by removing those tiers. Our analysis makes it clear when expander topologies like 

RNG bring the most or least value, allowing operators to make informed choices about the type of topology to use. 

## 10 RELATED WORK 

We build on the intellectual foundation laid by prior re-search that proposes expander topologies for datacenters or provides insights into their performance [ 4 , 22 , 23 , 34 ,42 , 46 ]. Particularly inspirational works for us include Jel-lyfish [ 42 ], the first work to propose random graphs for datacenters; Xpander [ 46 ], which made the connection that random graphs do well because they are expanders; and Nam-yar et al. [ 34 ], who outline throughput bounds of expander topologies. We extend this body of work by addressing un-solved challenges related to routing, cabling, and perfor-mance predictability. We also deploy the first expander-based networks in production. Researchers have also proposed non-expander topologies that tackle some of the challenges of the fat trees (e.g., cost), such as HyperX [ 1 ], DCell [ 18 ], and BCube [ 17 ]. We choose random graphs because they have significantly shorter path lengths. Further, cabling these other topologies for large, multi-room datacenters is still an open challenge. Capacity fungibility, a key goal of the RNG design, can be achieved using reconfigurable hardware as well. We use expander topologies because they need neither a (logically) centralized control plane nor non-standard hardware. Most designs with reconfigurable hardware require a control plane that predicts global traffic demands and dynamically recon-figures the topology [ 10 , 15 , 19 , 20 , 48 ]. The scale of our data-centers, presence of large amounts of bursty traffic (common 

> 12

for Web workloads), and reconfiguration delays complicate the development and operation of such control planes. There are "demand-oblivious" designs that do not require a centralized control plane [ 3 , 28 , 29 ]. They use novel optical devices that rapidly cycle through a fixed schedule. All-to-all connectivity is not available at any given time, and the systems use forwarding via intermediate nodes based on Birkhoff-von Neumann traffic matrix decomposition [ 7]. In addition to relying on non-commodity hardware, these de-signs bring a host of software risks such as time synchroniza-tion, packet reordering within a TCP flow, some throughput degradation [29], and switch-level congestion control [3]. 

## 11 CONCLUSIONS 

Expander topologies based on random graphs can be practi-cally realized using the routing and cabling approaches we developed, and they can be designed for the desired level of performance and cost using the models we developed. 

## REFERENCES 

[1] Jung Ho Ahn, Nathan Binkert, Al Davis, Moray McLaren, and Robert S Schreiber. 2009. HyperX: topology, routing, and packaging of effi-cient large-scale networks. In Proceedings of the Conference on High Performance Computing Networking, Storage and Analysis . 1–11. [2] Mohammad Al-Fares, Alexander Loukissas, and Amin Vahdat. 2008. A scalable, commodity data center network architecture. In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communication . 63–74. https://doi .org/ 10 .1145/1402958 .1402967 [3] Hitesh Ballani, Paolo Costa, Raphael Behrendt, Daniel Cletheroe, Ist-van Haller, Krzysztof Jozwik, Fotini Karinou, Sophie Lange, Kai Shi, Benn Thomsen, and Hugh Williams. 2020. Sirius: A Flat Datacenter Network with Nanosecond Optical Switching. In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communication . 782–797. https://doi .org/10 .1145/ 3387514 .3406221 [4] Maciej Besta and Torsten Hoefler. 2014. Slim fly: a cost effective low-diameter network topology. In Proceedings of the International Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis . 348–359. https://doi .org/10 .1109/SC .2014 .34 [5] Broadcom. 2026. Tomahawk 5 / BCM78900 series. (2026). https://www .broadcom .com/products/ethernet-connectivity/ switching/strataxgs/bcm78900-series [Retrieved 6-Feb-2026]. [6] Broadcom. 2026. Tomahawk3 / BCM56980 Series. (2026). https://www .broadcom .com/products/ethernet-connectivity/ switching/strataxgs/bcm56980-series [Retrieved 6-Feb-2026]. [7] Cheng-Shang Chang, Duan-Shin Lee, and Yi-Shean Jou. 2002. Load balanced Birkhoff–von Neumann switches, part I: One-stage buffering. 

Computer Communications 25, 6 (2002), 611–622. [8] Devdutt Dubhashi and Alessandro Panconesi. 2009. Concentration of Measure for the Analysis of Randomized Algorithms . Cambridge. [9] Facebook. 2014. Introducing data center fabric, the next-generation Facebook data center network. (2014). https://engineering .fb .com/ 2014/11/14/production-engineering/introducing-data-center-fabric-the-next-generation-facebook-data-center-network/ [Retrieved 6-Feb-2026]. [10] Nathan Farrington, George Porter, Sivasankar Radhakrishnan, Hamid Hajabdolali Bazzaz, Vikram Subramanya, Yeshaiahu Fainman, George Papen, and Amin Vahdat. 2010. Helios: a hybrid electrical/op-tical switch architecture for modular data centers. In Proc. ACM SIG-COMM Conference on Data Communication . 339–350. [11] Alan M. Frieze and Páll Melsted. 2012. Maximum matchings in ran-dom bipartite graphs and the space utilization of Cuckoo Hash tables. 

Random Struct. Algorithms 41, 3 (2012), 334–364. [12] fs.com. 2019. Fiber Distribution Panel Wiki, Types and Buying Tips. (2019). https://community .fs .com/article/fiber-distribution-panel-wiki-buying-tips .html [Retrieved: 2026-02-06]. [13] fs.com. 2026. 8 Fibers MTP Female Type 1 OM4 50/125 Multimode Fiber Loopback Module. (2026). https://www .fs .com/products/ 35796 .html?now_cid =2686 [Retrieved: 6-Feb-2026]. [14] Adithya Gangidi, Rui Miao, Shengbao Zheng, Sai Jayesh Bondu, Guilherme Goes, Hany Morsy, Rohit Puri, Mohammad Riftadi, Ashmitha Jeevaraj Shetty, Jingyi Yang, Shuqiang Zhang, Mikel Jimenez Fernandez, Shashidhar Gandham, and Hongyi Zeng. 2024. RDMA over Ethernet for Distributed Training at Meta Scale. In Proc. ACM SIG-COMM Conference on Data Communication . 57–70. https://doi .org/ 10 .1145/3651890 .3672233 [15] Monia Ghobadi, Ratul Mahajan, Amar Phanishayee, Nikhil Devanur, Ja-nardhan Kulkarni, Gireeja Ranade, Pierre-Alexandre Blanche, Houman Rastegarfar, Madeleine Glick, and Daniel Kilper. 2016. Projector: Ag-ile reconfigurable data center interconnect. In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communication . 216–229. [16] Albert Greenberg, James R. Hamilton, Navendu Jain, Srikanth Kan-dula, Changhoon Kim, Parantap Lahiri, David A. Maltz, Parveen Patel, and Sudipta Sengupta. 2009. VL2: a scalable and flexible data center network. In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communication .51–62. https://doi .org/10 .1145/1592568 .1592576 [17] Chuanxiong Guo, Guohan Lu, Dan Li, Haitao Wu, Xuan Zhang, Yun-feng Shi, Chen Tian, Yongguang Zhang, and Songwu Lu. 2009. BCube: a high performance, server-centric network architecture for modular data centers. In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communica-tion . 63–74. [18] Chuanxiong Guo, Haitao Wu, Kun Tan, Lei Shi, Yongguang Zhang, and Songwu Lu. 2008. Dcell: a scalable and fault-tolerant network structure for data centers. In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communication . 75–86. [19] Daniel Halperin, Srikanth Kandula, Jitendra Padhye, Paramvir Bahl, and David Wetherall. 2011. Augmenting data center networks with multi-gigabit wireless links. In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communication . 38–49. [20] Navid Hamedazimi, Zafar Qazi, Himanshu Gupta, Vyas Sekar, Samir R Das, Jon P Longtin, Himanshu Shah, and Ashish Tanwer. 2014. Firefly: A reconfigurable wireless data center fabric using free-space optics. In 

Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communication . 319–330. [21] Vipul Harsh, Sangeetha Abdu Jyothi, and P. Brighten Godfrey. 2020. Spineless Data Centers. In Proc. ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Net-works (HotNets) . 67–73. https://doi .org/10 .1145/3422604 .3425945 [22] Sangeetha Abdu Jyothi, Ankit Singla, P Brighten Godfrey, and Alexan-dra Kolla. 2016. Measuring and understanding throughput of network topologies. In Proceedings of the International Conference for High Per-formance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis (SC) . 761–772. [23] Simon Kassing, Asaf Valadarsky, Gal Shahaf, Michael Schapira, and Ankit Singla. 2017. Beyond fat-trees without antennae, mirrors, and disco-balls. In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communica-tion . 281–294. https://doi .org/10 .1145/3098822 .3098836 [24] Allan Kaye. 2025. Rail-Optimised Networking: How NVIDIA is Rethinking AI Network Design in the Data Centre. (2025). https://vespertec .com/news/rail-optimised-networking-how-nvidia-is-rethinking-ai-network-design-data-centre/ [Retrieved 3-Feb-2026]. 13 [25] Murali Kodialam, TV Lakshman, and Sudipta Sengupta. 2011. Traffic-oblivious routing in the hose model. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Net-working 19, 3 (2011), 774–787. [26] Alexander Krentsel, Nitika Saran, Bikash Koley, Subhasree Mandal, Ashok Narayanan, Sylvia Ratnasamy, Ali Al-Shabibi, Anees Shaikh, Rob Shakir, Ankit Singla, and Hakim Weatherspoon. 2024. A De-centralized SDN Architecture for the WAN. In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communication . 938–953. https://doi .org/10 .1145/ 3651890 .3672257 [27] Hong Liu, Ryohei Urata, Kevin Yasumura, Xiang Zhou, Roy Ban-non, Jill Berger, Pedram Dashti, Norm Jouppi, Cedric Lam, Sheng Li, Erji Mao, Daniel Nelson, George Papen, Mukarram Tariq, and Amin Vahdat. 2023. Lightwave Fabrics: At-Scale Optical Circuit Switching for Datacenter and Machine Learning Systems. In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communication . 499–515. https: //doi .org/10 .1145/3603269 .3604836 [28] William M Mellette, Rajdeep Das, Yibo Guo, Rob McGuinness, Alex C Snoeren, and George Porter. 2020. Expanding across time to deliver bandwidth efficiency and low latency. In USENIX Symposium on Net-worked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI) . 1–18. [29] William M. Mellette, Alex Forencich, Rukshani Athapathu, Alex C. Snoeren, George Papen, and George Porter. 2024. Realizing Rotor-Net: Toward Practical Microsecond Scale Optical Networking. In 

Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communication . 392–414. https://doi .org/10 .1145/3651890 .3672273 [30] Jeffrey C. Mogul and John Wilkes. 2023. Physical Deployability Matters. In Proc. ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks (HotNets) . 9–17. https://doi .org/10 .1145/3626111 .3628190 [31] Rajeev Motwani and Prabhakar Raghavan. 2001. Randomized Algo-rithms . Cambridge University Press. [32] Jayaram Mudigonda, Praveen Yalagandula, Mohammad Al-Fares, and Jeffrey C. Mogul. 2010. SPAIN: COTS data-center Ethernet for multi-pathing over arbitrary topologies. In USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI) . 18. [33] Jayaram Mudigonda, Praveen Yalagandula, and Jeffrey C. Mogul. 2011. Taming the Flying Cable Monster: A Topology Design and Optimiza-tion Framework for Data-Center Networks. In USENIX Annual Techni-cal Conference . https://api .semanticscholar .org/CorpusID:2989246 [34] Pooria Namyar, Sucha Supittayapornpong, Mingyang Zhang, Min-lan Yu, and Ramesh Govindan. 2021. A throughput-centric view of the performance of datacenter topologies. In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communication . 349–369. https://doi .org/10 .1145/ 3452296 .3472913 [35] Sabine R Ohring, Maximilian Ibel, Sajal K Das, and Mohan J Kumar. 1995. On generalized fat trees. In Proc. International Parallel Processing Symposium . 37–44. [36] Doron Puder. 2014. Expansion of random graphs: new proofs, new results. Inventiones mathematicae 201, 3 (Dec. 2014), 845–908. https: //doi .org/10 .1007/s00222-014-0560-x [37] Kun Qian, Yongqing Xi, Jiamin Cao, Jiaqi Gao, Yichi Xu, Yu Guan, Binzhang Fu, Xuemei Shi, Fangbo Zhu, Rui Miao, Chao Wang, Peng Wang, Pengcheng Zhang, Xianlong Zeng, Eddie Ruan, Zhiping Yao, Ennan Zhai, and Dennis Cai. 2024. Alibaba HPN: A Data Center Network for Large Language Model Training. In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communication . 691–706. https://doi .org/10 .1145/ 3651890 .3672265 [38] Brandon Schlinker, Radhika Niranjan Mysore, Sean Smith, Jef-frey C. Mogul, Amin Vahdat, Minlan Yu, Ethan Katz-Bassett, and Michael Rubin. 2015. Condor: Better Topologies Through Declarative Design.. In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communication . 449–463. http://dblp .uni-trier .de/db/conf/sigcomm/ sigcomm2015 .html#SchlinkerMSMVYK15 [39] Leah Shalev, Hani Ayoub, Nafea Bshara, and Erez Sabbag. 2020. A Cloud-Optimized Transport Protocol for Elastic and Scalable HPC. IEEE Micro 40, 6 (2020), 67–73. https://doi .org/10 .1109/ MM .2020 .3016891 [40] Arjun Singh, Joon Ong, Amit Agarwal, Glen Anderson, Ashby Armis-tead, Roy Bannon, Seb Boving, Gaurav Desai, Bob Felderman, Paulie Germano, Anand Kanagala, Jeff Provost, Jason Simmons, Eiichi Tanda, Jim Wanderer, Urs Hölzle, Stephen Stuart, and Amin Vahdat. 2015. Jupiter Rising: A Decade of Clos Topologies and Centralized Con-trol in Google’s Datacenter Network. In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Con-ference on Data Communication . 183–197. https://doi .org/10 .1145/ 2785956 .2787508 [41] Arjun Singhvi, Nandita Dukkipati, Prashant Chandra, Hassan M. G. Wassel, Naveen Kr. Sharma, Anthony Rebello, Henry Schuh, Praveen Kumar, Behnam Montazeri, Neelesh Bansod, Sarin Thomas, Inho Cho, Hyojeong Lee Seibert, Baijun Wu, Rui Yang, Yuliang Li, Kai Huang, Qianwen Yin, Abhishek Agarwal, Srinivas Vaduvatha, Wei-huang Wang, Masoud Moshref, Tao Ji, David Wetherall, and Amin Vahdat. 2025. Falcon: A Reliable, Low Latency Hardware Transport. In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communication . 248–263. https://doi .org/10 .1145/3718958 .3754353 [42] Ankit Singla, Chi-Yao Hong, Lucian Popa, and Philip Brighten Godfrey. 2012. Jellyfish: Networking Data Centers Randomly. In Proceedings of the 9th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Im-plementation (NSDI) . 225–238. https://www .usenix .org/conference/ nsdi12/technical-sessions/presentation/singla [43] snaketray.com. 2026. The Essential Guide to Data Center Cabling. (2026). https://www .snaketray .com/data-center-cabling-guide/ [Re-trieved 6-Feb-2026]. [44] F. Solano, R. Fabregat, Y. Donoso, and J.L. Marzo. 2005. Asymmetric tunnels in P2MP LSPs as a label space reduction method. In IEEE International Conference on Communications (ICC) , Vol. 1. 43–47 Vol. 1. https://doi .org/10 .1109/ICC .2005 .1494318 [45] F. Solano, R. Fabregat, and J.L. Marzo. 2005. Full label space reduc-tion in MPLS networks: asymmetric merged tunneling. IEEE Com-munications Letters 9, 11 (2005), 1021–1023. https://doi .org/10 .1109/ LCOMM .2005 .11016 [46] Asaf Valadarsky, Gal Shahaf, Michael Dinitz, and Michael Schapira. 2016. Xpander: Towards Optimal-Performance Datacenters. In Proc. International on Conference on emerging Networking EXperiments and Technologies (CoNEXT) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 205–219. https://doi .org/10 .1145/2999572 .2999580 [47] Leslie G Valiant and Gordon J Brebner. 1981. Universal schemes for par-allel communication. In Proc. ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing (STOC) . 263–277. [48] Guohui Wang, David G. Andersen, Michael Kaminsky, Konstantina Pa-pagiannaki, T.S. Eugene Ng, Michael Kozuch, and Michael Ryan. 2010. c-Through: part-time optics in data centers. In Proc. ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Data Communication . 327–338. https://doi .org/10 .1145/ 1851182 .1851222 [49] Wikipedia. 2026. Balls into bins problem. (2026). https:// en .wikipedia .org/wiki/Balls _into _bins _problem [Retrieved 6-Feb-2026]. [50] Wikipedia. 2026. Expander graph. (2026). https://en .wikipedia .org/ wiki/Expander_graph [Retrieved 6-Feb-2026]. [51] Wikipedia. 2026. k-shortest path routing. (2026). https:// en .wikipedia .org/wiki/K _ shortest _ path _routing [Retrieved: 6-Feb-2026]. [52] Wikipedia. 2026. Menger’s Theorem. (2026). https://en .wikipedia .org/ wiki/Menger%27s_theorem [Retrieved: 6-Feb-2026]. [53] Wikipedia. 2026. Multi-commodity flow problem. (2026). https: //en .wikipedia .org/wiki/Multi-commodity _flow _ problem [Retrieved: 14 6-Feb-2026]. [54] Damon Wischik, Costin Raiciu, Adam Greenhalgh, and Mark Handley. 2011. Design, Implementation and Evaluation of Congestion Control for Multipath TCP. In USENIX Sympo-sium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI) .https://www .usenix .org/conference/nsdi11/design-implementation-and-evaluation-congestion-control-multipath-tcp [55] Nicholas Wormald. 1999. Models of Random Regular Graphs . Cam-bridge. https://web .williams .edu/Mathematics/sjmiller/public _ html/ ntprob19/handouts/graphs/Womald_ModelsRandomGraphs .pdf [56] Eitan Zahavi. 2012. Fat-tree routing and node ordering providing contention free traffic for MPI global collectives. J. Parallel and Distrib. Comput. 72, 11 (2012), 1423–1432. https://doi .org/10 .1016/ j.jpdc .2012 .01 .018 Communication Architectures for Scalable Sys-tems. [57] Xia Zhou, Zengbin Zhang, Yibo Zhu, Yubo Li, Saipriya Kumar, Amin Vahdat, Ben Y Zhao, and Haitao Zheng. 2012. Mirror mirror on the ceil-ing: Flexible wireless links for data centers. ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 42, 4 (2012), 443–454. 

## A INCREMENTAL CABLING 

The physical connectivity of RNG described in §6 can be achieved incrementally. While the first room of the data-center is being prepared, we deploy its patching panel. The number of ShuffleBoxes in the panel is based on the number of ToR uplinks expected in the room. Initially, all r-ports and c-ports have ShuffleBacks in them. When racks land in the room, ToRs are connected to random r-ports, as part of which the ShuffleBacks of selected r-ports are removed. The ToRs start forming a random graph via c-port ShuffleBacks, as in Figure 6(a). Not all ToR uplinks may find a match during this process (more on this below). While the second room is being prepared, we land its shuffle panel and connect those c-ports to the panel in the first room. If panels are equal-sized, half of the c-ports in each must connect to the other panel; otherwise, we adjust proportionally. The ports are picked randomly. The c-port connections are enabled by the trunk cables between the two rooms. Making these connections requires removing Shuf-fleBacks from c-ports, as a result of which the connectivity pattern for some ToRs may go from Figure 6(a) to Figure 6(c), except that both ToRs are in the same room. When racks can land in the second room, those ToRs connect to random r-ports in the second room’s panel. Some of these ToR uplinks will connect to ToRs in the first room via c-port connections, as in Figure 6(b); some will connect to other ToRs in the same room via c-port ShuffleBacks; and, at least initially, some will fail to find a match. When the third room starts, we land its panel and rebal-ance c-port connectivity. When there were two rooms, half of the first room’s c-ports connected to the second room. When the third room starts, a third must go to the second room and a third to the third room (and a third have Shuf-fleBacks). To rebalance c-port connectivity, we break some 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5     

> Fraction of ToRs deployed
> 0.00
> 0.25
> 0.50
> 0.75
> 1.00
> Fraction of
> matched uplinks
> Room 1 Room 2 Room 3 Room 4 Room 5

Figure 15: Matched uplinks as the datacenter grows. 

existing c-port connections (selected randomly) between the first two rooms and use the freed up c-ports to connect to the third room. We follow the same process of landing panels and rebalancing connectivity for all subsequent rooms. Rebalancing connectivity breaks logical links that carry live traffic. We thus drain impacted links to minimize impact. Strictly speaking, logical connectivity changes when racks land and r-port ShuffleBacks are removed, but the blast radius of that operation is much smaller ( 𝑓 𝑟 =4 versus 𝑓 𝑐 =32). 

## A.1 Growing pains 

An artifact of our incremental construction is that early in the growth of the datacenter, not all ToR uplinks form valid adjacencies. For an uplink in room 1 to form an adjacency, it must connect to an r-port FP that is bridged (by the Shuffle-Box’s c-port ShuffleBack) to an r-port connected to another uplink. When only a small fraction of r-ports are populated, this probability is low. A similar effect occurs for the second room but is less severe because half of ToR uplinks connect to r-port FPs that are connected to the first room via c-ports and find matches there. Figure 15 plots the fraction of deployed uplinks with valid adjacencies as we deploy more ToRs. This simulated data-center has 10 rooms with 100 ToRs each. We see the fraction of uplinks in room 1 that find a match increases linearly. After room 2 opens, there is an initial dip in the fraction of matched uplinks because room 2 ToRs have fewer matched uplinks and their ratio in the population is growing. But the lowest point in the dip is still above 90%. The impact is negligible beyond room 2. We present a model of datacenter expansion that accu-rately predicts the average degree at each point in the data-center growth. Operators can use the model to predict the average degree during expansion and plan accordingly. As the "W/o phases" curve of Figure 16 shows, these grow-ing pains lead to poor early throughput for room 1 (and room 1 only). Amazon operators view this behavior as acceptable for fast-growing datacenters. The window of poor perfor-mance is short and they can delay on-boarding applications.          

> 15 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
> Fraction of ToRs deployed
> 0
> 5
> 10
> 15
> Oversub. ratio
> Room 1 Room 2 Room 3 Room 4 Room 5
> W/o phases
> With phases

Figure 16: Oversubscription as the datacenter grows. 

But the poor early performance can be problematic for slow-growing datacenters. For these cases, we propose a modified cabling scheme. We partition the ShuffleBoxes of the first room’s shuffle panel into two or more phases. Initial ToRs connect only to phase 1 ShuffleBoxes. When these ShuffleBoxes are full, we connect the c-ports of phase 1 and phase 2 ShuffleBoxes and start mapping future ToRs to phase 2 ShuffleBoxes. This process is repeated for future phases. It essentially divides a room into smaller, logical rooms and shrinks the poor performance window. The "With phases" curve of Figure 16 shows the impact of phased cabling. We partitioned room 1 into two phases, and the size of the first phase was 30% of the room. This config-uration is optimal when operators want average degree of the datacenter to always stay above 0.8 as soon as 25% of the racks in room 1 are deployed. Next, we show how to derive optimal phase sizes for user-defined performance criteria. 

## A.2 Modeling expansion 

We present a model of datacenter expansion that predicts the average degree of the fabric at each point in time. The expansion occurs in stages , where each stage corresponds to the landing of new panels of ShuffleBoxes and associated re-cabling. Routers of a stage only connect to ShuffleBoxes of that stage. A stage could be a room or a phase within a room, and the analysis makes no assumption about the number or relative sizes of various stages. We model datacenter expansion using “time" 𝑡 as the pri-mary variable, where 𝑡 ∈ [ 0, 1] is the fraction (relative to the full DC) of routers currently landed. We denote a stage that begins at 𝑡 1 and ends at 𝑡 2 as [𝑡 1, 𝑡 2]. Abusing notation, we will simply denote a router by its timestamp of arrival. Each router has 𝑑 uplinks. During the first stage, when there are no routers from previous stages, the probability of a ToR uplink finding a match increases linearly because the probability depends on bridging to an occupied r-port which grows linearly with 𝑡 .The average degree of the fabric at time 𝑡 is d 𝑡 𝑇 0 , where 𝑇 0 is the size of the first stage. 0.0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5     

> Fraction of ToRs deployed
> 0.00
> 0.25
> 0.50
> 0.75
> 1.00
> Fraction of
> matched uplinks
> Room 1 Room 2 Room 3 Room 4 Room 5
> RNG: W/o phases
> RNG: With phases
> Model: W/o phases
> Model: With phases

Figure 17: Comparison of fraction of uplinks that find a match based on simulation of Figure 15 versus what is predicted by the model. 

For subsequent stages, the following invariants hold about 

RNG ’s datacenter expansion: (1) At the end of any stage, the graph degree is 𝑑 because all routers would have found a match. (2) During a stage, all routers from previous stages main-tain their degree of 𝑑 .(3) When a router on a stage lands, only some of its up-links find a match. On expectation, that fraction is the fraction of routers present. Formally, for stage [𝑡 1, 𝑡 2],there are 𝑡 1 routers from previous stages, and we will land routers 𝑡 1 + 1, 𝑡 1 + 2, . . . , 𝑡 2. The 𝑖 -th router in this stage will make (on expectation) a 𝑡 1+𝑖 𝑡 2 fraction of connections when it lands. Based on these invariants, we can prove: 

Model A.1. The average degree during the stage [𝑡 1, 𝑡 2]

(𝑡 1 > 0) is 𝑑 

h 𝑡 1 

> 𝑡

+ 𝑡 −𝑡 1

> 𝑡 2

i

Proof. The stage [𝑡 1, 𝑡 2] begins with a 𝑡 1 fraction of routers connected (with degree 𝑑 ) and ends with a 𝑡 2 fraction of routers. At time 𝑡 ∈ [ 𝑡 1, 𝑡 2], all routers with timestamp at most 𝑡 1 always have a degree of 𝑑 , and the routers of the current stage will have, on average, a degree of 𝑑𝑡 /𝑡 2. The fraction of routers with timestamp at most 𝑡 1 is 𝑡 1/𝑡 , and the fraction of routers of the current stage is (𝑡 − 𝑡 1)/ 𝑡 .Thus, the average degree at time 𝑡 is: 

𝑡 1

𝑡 · 𝑑 + 𝑡 − 𝑡 1

𝑡 · 𝑑𝑡 𝑡 2

= 𝑑 

h 𝑡 1

𝑡 + 𝑡 − 𝑡 1

𝑡 2

i

(1) 

□

Figure 17 compares Model A.1 with a simulated fabric from Figure 16. We see that the model matches simulations well, and the curves are virtually indistinguishable. 

## A.3 Computing optimal phases 

The expansion model enables us to find optimal phases. We formulate the problem as: Find the minimum number of phases and their sizes such that the average degree is at least 

> 16

𝛼𝑑 when at least a 𝛽 -fraction of the first room is deployed. The parameters 𝛼 and 𝛽 are operator-provided inputs. We solve the problem by applying Model A.1 to the first room, treating each phase as a stage. We know that the average degree increases linearly in the first stage. So, if 

𝛼 ≤ 𝛽 , we only require a single phase (i.e., not using phases at all). If 𝛼 > 𝛽 , our aim is to maximize 𝛼 for a given 𝛽 , or equivalently, minimize 𝛽 for a given choice of 𝛼 .Let us now consider the case of two phases in a room. 

Theorem A.1. With two phases in a room, for a given 𝛼 , the minimum possible 𝛽 is 𝛼 (1 − √1 − 𝛼 )2. Further, the minimum occurs when the size of the first phase is 𝛽 /𝛼 .

Proof. Let us first observe that the formula in Model A.1 is a hyperbola ( 𝑡 1/𝑡 + 𝑡 /𝑡 2). Its minimum is at the geometric mean √𝑡 1𝑡 2, so the minimum average degree is: 

𝑑 (2√︁ 𝑡 1/𝑡 2 − 𝑡 1/𝑡 2) (2) Let us now denote the minimum possible 𝛽 as 𝛽 ∗. In the first phase, the average degree increase linearly. At time 𝛽 ∗,it needs to be at least 𝛼𝑑 . This phase ends when the average degree is 𝑑 , which happens when time is 𝛽 ∗/𝛼 , which we denote using 𝑥 for convenience. At this point, the next phase begins and continues to the end of the room. If the end of room deployment as 𝑡 = 1, we have the stage being [𝑥, 1]. Applying Equation 2, the minimum average degree is 𝑑 (2√𝑥 − 𝑥 ). Since we require the average degree to be 𝛼𝑑 at all times, 2√𝑥 − 𝑥 ≥ 𝛼 .Consider the quadratic 𝑓 (𝑥 ) = 𝑥 − 2√𝑥 + 𝛼 . We need to choose 𝑥 so that 𝑓 (𝑥 ) ≤ 0, which happens after the first root of the quadratic. The roots of 𝑓 (𝑥 ) are 

2 ± √4 − 4𝛼 

2 = 1 ± √1 − 𝛼 

The smaller root is 1 − √1 − 𝛼 , and we need 𝑥 to be at least this value. Plugging in the expression for 𝑥 ,√︂ 

𝛽 ∗

𝛼 ≥ 1 − √1 − 𝛼 =⇒ 𝛽 ∗ ≥ 𝛼 (1 − √1 − 𝛼 )2

□

For a better understanding of the formula in Theorem A.1, Figure 18 plots the optimal 𝛽 versus 𝛼 . We see if we want the degree to be at least 0.8𝑑 , we can get that as soon as 𝛽 ≈ 25% 

of the room is deployed. This performance can be obtained if the first phase is ≈30% of the first room. If the 𝛽 ∗ of the two-phase deployment does not meet the operator criterion, we can perform a similar analysis for suc-cessively higher number of phases until we find the number of phases where the criterion is met. These iterations are guaranteed to terminate. In the extreme, each router is its own phase and the graph degree is always 𝑑 .0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> ( (1  1 )2)

Figure 18: The minimum 𝛽 achievable, for a given 𝛼 in a two-phase deployment Latency differential 

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> CDF over paths
> Estimated
> Measured

Figure 19: Comparison between estimated latency based on datacenter layout and measurements on the production fabric. Units omitted for confidentiality. 4 6 8 10  

> Latency ( s)
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> CDF over paths
> Fat tree
> RNG (baseline)
> RNG (biased
> waypoints)
> RNG (biased
> waypoints, cabling)

Figure 20: Latency distribution of ToR-to-ToR paths 

## B LATENCY REDUCTION 

While expander topologies have fewer hops than fat trees, we find that when deployed in a large datacenter their latency can be worse because hops can be long (half the datacenter length on average). The higher propagation delay exceeds what is saved in switching costs due to fewer hops. To demonstrate this challenge, we simulate a datacenter with a span of 300 meters and 4K ToRs spread across 10 

> 17

equally-sized rooms. For RNG , the patching panels are lo-cated in the center of each room. The fat tree has 4 tiers. ToRs connect to aggregation pods with two tiers of switches, where the bottom tier connects to ToRs and the top tier to spine routers. Aggregation pods are located in the center of each room to serve the ToRs in the room, and all spine routers are in one room in the middle of the datacenter [ 9]. For both topologies, the link speed is 100 Gbps and cables travel along cable trays [ 43 ]. Figure 19 validates the accu-racy of our latency estimation methodology by comparing what it estimates for the production server mesh (§8) with measurements on the fabric. While the fat tree has 6 hops and RNG has 4 hops for the vast majority of ToR pairs in the simulated datacenter, Figure 20 shows that the median one-way latency of (" RNG 

(baseline)") is 15% higher (8.4 vs. 7.1 𝜇𝑠 ). This difference may seem small, but it compounds over round trips for applica-tions and so datacenter operators are sensitive to it. Simple modifications to routing and cabling reduce the latency of RNG without compromising performance. 

Biased waypoint selection . When selecting waypoints, instead of picking 𝑝 random neighbors of 𝑣 ∈ 𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ), pre-fer waypoints closer to 𝑡 . We implement this preference by ranking each candidate waypoint 𝑤 using 𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑚 _𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡 (𝑤, 𝑣 ) + 

𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑚 _𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡 (𝑣, 𝑡 ), where 𝑟𝑜𝑜𝑚 _𝑑𝑖𝑠𝑡 () is the distance between rooms of the two nodes. Using coarse, room-level distances, instead of actual fiber runs, avoids systematically preferring advantageously-located waypoints (e.g., close to cable trays). 

Biased cabling . We lower the number of inter-room connec-tions, which are longer than intra-room ones. Specifically, a patching panel makes 𝛼 × 1 

> 𝑅

× 𝐶 × 𝑑 𝑐 c-port connections to another panel, where 𝐶 , 𝑅 , 𝑑 𝑐 are the number of Shuffle-Boxes, rooms, and c-ports per ShuffleBoxes, and 𝛼 ∈ [ 0, 1] is a parameter that controls the amount of inter-room connec-tions. For the baseline construction, 𝛼 = 1. We use 𝛼 = 0.5,which reduces number of inter-room connections by half. It reduces latency without hurting throughput because there is still enough inter-room capacity. Another positive side-effect of this optimization is that it reduces (by 1−𝛼 ) the number of inter-room cables, an important factor behind cabling costs. Figure 20 shows that the combination of these modifica-tions makes the median latency of RNG similar to that of the fat tree. Biased waypoint selection reduces the median latency by 0.3 𝜇𝑠 and biased cabling by a further 1 𝜇𝑠 .Latency can be further reduced by limiting spraying to a subset of neighbors that have shorter paths to the destination and by selecting the ℎ next hops in a distance-aware manner. But, unlike the two modifications above, these modifications reduce, respectively, the number of edge disjoint paths and throughput for some traffic matrices. They must thus be used only in settings where reduced performance is acceptable. We experimented with a few other ideas, such as spraying to only a subset of close neighbors and biasing the selection of ℎ random next hops, but they either reduced throughput or did not bring substantial benefit. 

## C MODELING OVERVIEW 

Our modeling of RNG prioritizes simpler formulas over math-ematical precision. It makes numerous modeling assump-tions and performs asymptotic analysis (as 𝑛 gets large) that ignores lower order terms in some situations. We constrain the operating regime to where the inaccuracy of these as-sumptions and asymptotics is minimal. Recall from §7 that this regime is (i) 2(ln (𝑛 ) + 5) ≤ 𝑑 ≪ 𝑛 , (ii) 𝑝 ≥ ( 𝑛 /𝑑 2)1/ℓ ,and (iii) ℎ ≪ 𝑑 , where 𝑛 and 𝑑 are the node count and degree. Further, given random topology and routing, the analysis is inherently probabilistic, i.e., results hold with high probabil-ity and can fail with low probability. The following sections derive the performance models in §7 in a stepwise manner. 

Random graph preliminaries (§D): The first step of the modeling is to define a probabilistic process that generates the random network topology. We give a precise formulation, since this forms the foundation of the analysis. We prove some basic theorems about the graph construction. This section is purely using random graph theory, and does not involve any asymptotics or modeling of Spraypoint/routing. 

Modeling path length (§E): We begin the actual analysis by giving formulas for the sizes of various Spraypoint levels. The random graph theorems from §D are used to determine the structure of the Spraypoint levels and their sizes. The path length distributions follow quite directly from these formulas. These formulas use asymptotics to get convenient expressions. This yields Model 7.2. 

Modeling edge disjoint paths (§F): Armed with the tools from the previous sections, we can analyze the mincut properties between a source-destination pair. For this analy-sis, we make some minor modeling assumptions, to represent the flow as a tractable balls and bins problem. A detailed, tight analysis of these problems has been done before [ 11 ], but we observe that a simpler upper bound formula is close enough. This bound is given in Model 7.1. 

Modeling oversubscription (§G): The most difficult part of our analysis is bounding the oversubscription ratio. For this analysis, we use many modeling assumptions (detailed in §G.1). The oversubscription ratio is the output of a multi-commodity flow linear program, so it is much harder to get a simple formula. Moreover, the mathematics of interacting flows is complex and we resort to various simplifications based on intuitions on random graphs. Our final formula is given by a collection of polynomial equations in the various parameters, as given in §7.3. 

> 18

## D RANDOM GRAPH PRELIMINARIES 

The router graph 𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸 ) has 𝑛 nodes and degree 𝑑 .We model its construction as a random configuration graph (Chap. 2 of [ 55 ]). There are various ways to construct graphs in the configuration model, all of which are statistically equiv-alent and provide convenient analytical tools. 

• The standard method: consider each node as incident to 𝑑 “half-edges". Paired half-edges result in a proper edge. We generate a pairing with a uniform random permutation of all half-edges, and matching the first to the second, the third to the fourth, and so on. 

• Getting the neighborhood of a set 𝑆 : Condition on some edges within 𝑆 . Each remaining half-edge in 𝑆 picks inde-pendently another uar (uniformly at random) half-edge in graph to pair with. If multiple 𝑆 half-edges pick the same partner to pair with, only one them (picked randomly) will pair up. The others remain unpaired. At this stage, some of the half-edges in 𝑆 have paired up. Now, we simply pair up all remaining half-edges in the graph using the standard method (which has dependencies). The first part makes a collection of independent decisions, allowing for easier analysis. 

## D.1 Probability preliminaries 

We list some probability theory definitions and theorems used in the analysis. In what follows, capital letters 𝑋, 𝑌, 𝑍 

denote non-negative integer-valued random variables; E[𝑋 ]

denotes the expectation of 𝑋 . script letters E, F , . . . denote events; and Pr [E] denotes the probability of event E.The first theorem will help us derive expected values of a collection of random variables. It makes no independence assumption on the random variables. 

Theorem D.1. [Linearity of Expectation] For any finite collection of random variables 𝑋 1, 𝑋 2, . . . , 𝑋 𝑘 , E[Í𝑖 ≤𝑘 𝑋 𝑖 ] =Í𝑖 ≤𝑘 E[𝑋 𝑖 ].

The next theorem is convenient for dealing with “error bounds" and bounding the probability of bad events. 

Theorem D.2. [Union bound] Given a finite collection of events E1, E2, . . . , E𝑘 , Pr [Ð𝑖 ≤𝑘 E𝑖 ] ≤ Í𝑖 ≤𝑘 Pr [E 𝑖 ].

The following states classic concentration inequalities that upper bound the probability of a random variable deviating significantly from its expectation. 

Theorem D.3. [The Chernoff bound] (Theorem 1.1 of [ 8]) Let 𝑋 = Í𝑖 ≤𝑘 𝑋 𝑖 , where the 𝑋 𝑖 ’s are independent random variables in [0, 1]. Then, 

• For all 𝜀 ∈ ( 0, 1), Pr [𝑋 < (1 − 𝜀 )E[𝑋 ]] , Pr [𝑋 > (1 +

𝜀 )E[𝑋 ]] ≤ exp (− 𝜀 2E[𝑋 ]/ 3).

• For all 𝑡 , Pr [𝑋 > E[𝑋 ] + 𝑡 ], Pr [𝑋 < E[𝑋 ] − 𝑡 ] ≤ 

exp (− 2𝑡 2/𝑘 ).

• If 𝑡 > 2𝑒 E[𝑋 ], then Pr [𝑋 > 𝑡 ] ≤ 2−𝑡 .

We use the phrase with high probability to denote prob-ability at least 1 − 𝑜 (1), with asymptotics over increasing 

𝑛 .

## D.2 Random graph tools 

We state and prove some probabilistic graph theorems that will be useful in the analysis. 

Claim D.4. Consider a node set 𝑆 . Condition on any choice of edges within 𝑆 that leave 𝑘 half-edges unpaired. The probability that a vertex 𝑣 ∉ 𝑆 is a neighbor of 𝑆 is at least 1 − exp (− 𝑘 /𝑛 ).

Proof. Conditioned on the current choice of edges in 𝑆 ,let us consider the process of building the neighbors of 𝑆 . As described above, in the first step of this process, each of the 

𝑘 half-edges incident to 𝑆 picks a uar unpaired half-edge to pair with. Fix 𝑣 ∉ 𝑆 . Let us look at the probability that a single iteration connects with one of the 𝑑 half-edges incident to 𝑣 .This probability is at least 𝑑 /𝑛𝑑 = 1/𝑛 .Since there are 𝑘 independent iterations, one for each unpaired half-edge incident to 𝑆 , the probability that no iteration connects with 𝑣 is at most (1 − 1/𝑛 )𝑘 . Applying the inequality 1 − 𝑥 ≤ exp (− 𝑥 ), we upper bound by exp (− 𝑘 /𝑛 ).Thus, the probability of 𝑣 connecting to 𝑆 is at least 1 −

exp (− 𝑘 /𝑛 ). □

Let us unpack this expression. Using the approximation (for small 𝑥 ), exp (− 𝑥 ) ≈ 1 − 𝑥 , roughly speaking, we can approximate as 1 − ( 1 − 𝑘 /𝑛 ) = 𝑘 /𝑛 .The following claim shows that all sets of sufficiently large size connect with every other node. It is a special case of the proof that the configuration model generates expanders. 

Claim D.5. Fix subset 𝑆 ⊆ 𝑉 and condition on any choice of edges within 𝑆 that leaves at least 𝑛𝑑 /4 unpaired half-edges incident to 𝑆 . With probability at least 1 − 𝑛 −4, every 𝑣 ∈ 𝑉 \ 𝑆 

has an edge to 𝑆 .

Proof. By Claim D.4, the probability that 𝑣 ∉ 𝑆 is not aneighbor of 𝑆 is at most exp (− 𝑘 /𝑛 ) ≤ exp (− 𝑑 /4). Let event 

E𝑣 occur when 𝑣 does not connect to 𝑆 . By the union bound 

Pr [Ð𝑣 ∉𝑆 E𝑣 ] ≤ Í𝑣 ∉𝑆 Pr [E 𝑣 ] ≤ 𝑛 exp (− 𝑑 /4) ≤ 𝑛 −4 (since 

𝑑 ≫ ln 𝑛 ). The event Ð𝑣 ∉𝑆 E𝑣 occurs precisely when all vertices outside 𝑆 have an edge to 𝑆 . □

## E MODELING PATH LENGTH 

This section models the path lengths in the RNG fabrics. We begin by bounding the sizes of Spraypoint levels. 

## E.1 Level sizes 

Let us fix a destination 𝑡 , and for convenience, denote 𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 (𝑡 )

as 𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 . We imagine constructing the levels incrementally, to-gether with the graph. So 𝑊 𝑃 ≤𝑖 := Ð𝑗 ≤𝑖 𝑊 𝑃 𝑗 is constructed, and then we choose the randomness to construct 𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 +1.

> 19

Conditioning on 𝑊 𝑃 ≤𝑖 implies fixing the graph inside 𝑊 𝑃 ≤𝑖 .So we have fixed all the edges between the waypoints up to this level. Then 𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 chooses some of its edges to determine 

𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 +1. It is convenient to set 𝑊 𝑃 0 to be 𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ).We state and prove our main theorem about level sizes. Recall that ℓ := max (1, ⌈log 𝑝 (𝑛 /2𝑑 2)⌉) .

Theorem E.1. Fix destination 𝑡 . The following bounds hold with probability ≥ 1 − 𝑜 (1). We set 𝜆 := 𝑝 ℓ𝑑 2/𝑛 .

• For 0 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ ℓ, |𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 (𝑡 )| = (1 ± 𝑜 (1)) 𝑑𝑝 𝑖 .

• | 𝑂𝑅 (𝑡 )| ≤ ( exp (− 𝜆 ) + 𝑜 (1)) 𝑛 .

• All nodes in 𝑂𝑅 (𝑡 ) have an edge to a node in 𝐼𝑅 (𝑡 ).

The proof has a few moving parts, so we separate them out. For any set of nodes 𝑆 , we use 𝑁 (𝑆 ) to denote the neigh-borhood of 𝑆 (which may include nodes in 𝑆 ). 

Claim E.2. For any 𝑖 , condition on |𝑊 𝑃 ≤𝑖 | ≤ 𝑛 /𝑑 . The probability that any node 𝑣 has more than 𝑑 /2 edges to 𝑊 𝑃 ≤𝑖 

is at most 1/𝑛 .

Proof. The node 𝑣 makes 𝑑 connections. Consider choos-ing these randomly as follows. First, each half-edge incident to 𝑣 chooses to connect with a node in 𝑊 𝑃 ≤𝑖 with proba-bility |𝑊 𝑃 ≤𝑖 |/ 𝑛 ≤ 1/𝑑 . Once these choices are made, then the half-edges are paired to a random half-edge in 𝑊 𝑃 ≤𝑖 or 

𝑊 𝑃 ≤𝑖 respectively. Each of these choices can be represented as a Bernoulli 𝑋 𝑖 , and the sum 𝑋 = Í𝑖 ≤𝑑 𝑋 𝑖 is the number of edges 𝑣 has into 𝑊 𝑃 ≤𝑖 .We note that E[𝑋 ] ≤ 1. By the Chernoff bound Theo-rem D.3, Pr [𝑋 ≥ 𝑑 /2] ≤ 2−𝑑 /2. By a union bound over all nodes, the probability that any node has more than 𝑑 /2 edges is at most 𝑛 2−𝑑 /2. Since 𝑑 ≥ 2(ln 𝑛 + 5), 𝑛 2−𝑑 /2 ≤ 𝑛 −5. □

The following lemma encapsulates a key calculation. 

Lemma E.3. Condition on a set 𝑆 of nodes with at least half of its incident half-edges unpaired. Let |𝑆 | ≥ 𝑑 /2. Consider pairing all the half-edges incident to 𝑆 . Then, with probability at least 1 − 𝑛 −10 , |𝑁 (𝑆 )| ≥ min (𝑛 /4, |𝑆 |𝑑 /4). Moreover, if 

|𝑆 | ≤ 𝑛 /𝑑 , at least (𝑑 − 4)| 𝑁 (𝑆 )| half-edges incident to 𝑁 (𝑆 )

are left unpaired. 

Proof. We will perform a coupling of the random variable 

|𝑁 (𝑆 )| as follows. We initially mark an arbitrary set of 𝑛 /4

nodes. We pair the half-edges incident to 𝑆 iteratively. If a pairing connects to an unmarked node and the number of current neighbors of 𝑆 is < 𝑛 /4: we pick an marked non-neighbor of 𝑆 , unmark it, and marked the (new) unmarked neighbor. (Otherwise, we do not change the marking.) Thus, if there are fewer than 𝑛 /4 neighbors of 𝑆 , then all neighbors of 𝑆 are marked. For the 𝑟 th half-edge paired, let 𝑋 𝑟 be the indicator of the 

𝑟 th half-edge pairing with an unmarked node. Since the num-ber of marked nodes is exactly 𝑛 /4, the number of unmarked nodes is also exactly 3𝑛 /4. Hence, Pr [𝑋 𝑟 = 1] = 3/4. Recall that there are at least 𝑘 ≥ | 𝑆 |𝑑 /2 unpaired half-edges inci-dent to 𝑆 Let 𝑋 = Í𝑟 ≤𝑘 𝑋 𝑟 , so E[𝑋 ] = 3𝑘 /4. By the Chernoff bound of Theorem D.3, Pr [Í𝑟 𝑋 𝑟 ≤ 𝑘 /2] ≤ exp (− E[𝑋 ]/( 3 ·

32)) ≤ exp (−| 𝑆 |𝑑 /54 ) ≤ exp (− 𝑑 2/108 ). Since 𝑑 ≥ ln 𝑛 , this probability can be bounded by 𝑛 −10 (for sufficiently large 𝑛 ). So, with high probability, 𝑋 ≥ 𝑘 /2 ≥ | 𝑆 |( 𝑑 /4). This means that either each iteration connected to an unmarked node (thereby creating a new neighbor) or the number of neigh-bors was at least 𝑛 /4. Thus, |𝑁 (𝑆 )| ≥ min (𝑛 /4, |𝑆 |𝑑 /4).If |𝑆 | ≤ 𝑛 /𝑑 , then |𝑆 |/| 𝑁 (𝑆 )| ≤ 4/𝑑 . We paired up at most 

|𝑆 |𝑑 half-edges in the above random process. Hence, there are at least |𝑁 (𝑆 )| 𝑑 − | 𝑆 |𝑑 = |𝑁 (𝑆 )| 𝑑 − 4|𝑁 (𝑆 )| ≥ ( 𝑑 − 4)| 𝑁 (𝑆 )| 𝑑 

half-edges incident to 𝑁 (𝑆 ) that are unpaired. □

E.1.1 The first bullet point of Theorem E.1. We prove the first bullet point by an induction over 𝑖 . We require a stronger induction hypothesis. We will prove that, conditioned on a choice of 𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 that leaves at least 𝑑 |𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 |/ 2 half-edges un-paired, with high probability, the construction of 𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 +1 en-sures that |𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 +1 | ≥ ( 1 −𝑜 (1)) 𝑝𝑑 𝑖 +1 and at least 𝑑 |𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 +1 |/ 2

half-edges of 𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 +1 are unpaired. We now perform the induction. We first deal with the base case 𝑊 𝑃 0, the neighbor set. Consider the pairing the 𝑑 

half-edges incident to 𝑡 , one by one. Take the 𝑟 th half-edge being paired. There are at most 𝑑 neighbors of 𝑡 already con-structed, by the pairing of previous half-edges. The probabil-ity that the 𝑟 th half-edge connects to one of these neighbors is at most 𝑑 /𝑛 , regardless of all the previous choices. Let 𝑍 

be the random variable denoting the number of half-edges connecting to an existing neighbor. The upper tail probabili-ties of 𝑍 is dominated by the corresponding tail of 𝐵 (𝑑 /𝑛, 𝑑 ).(Here, 𝐵 (𝑘, 𝛼 ) denotes the binomial of 𝑘 independent tri-als with success probability 𝛼 .) We can apply the Chernoff bound to 𝐵 (𝑑 /𝑛, 𝑑 ). Let 𝑌 ∼ 𝐵 (𝑑 /𝑛, 𝑑 ). Note that E[𝑌 ] =

(𝑑 /𝑛 ) · 𝑑 = 𝑑 2/𝑛 . Since 𝑑 ≪ 𝑛 , for sufficiently small 𝜀 > 0,

𝜀𝑑 ≥ 2𝑒𝑑 2/𝑛 . By Theorem D.3, Pr [𝑌 ≥ 𝜀𝑑 ] < 2−𝜀𝑑 = 𝑜 (1).Thus, Pr [𝑍 ≥ 𝜀𝑑 ] ≤ Pr [𝑌 ≥ 𝜀𝑑 ] = 𝑜 (1). In words, the over-all probability of the half-edges connecting to 𝜀𝑑 existing neighbors is 𝑜 (1). So, with probability 1 − 𝑜 (1), the size of the neighbor set 𝑊 𝑃 0 is at least (1 − 𝑜 (1)) 𝑑 .At this stage, there are (𝑑 − 1)| 𝑊 𝑃 0 | unpaired half-edges incident to 𝑊 𝑃 0. The only paired half-edges (formed edges) are those incident to 𝑡 , so each neighbor in 𝑊 𝑃 0 is incident to (𝑑 − 1) unpaired half-edges. We split into two cases, depending on ℓ.

Case 1, ℓ = 1: In this case, there is just 𝑊 𝑃 1 to consider. As argued above, with high probability, |𝑊 𝑃 0 | = 𝑑 − 𝑜 (1) and it is incident to |𝑊 𝑃 0 |( 𝑑 − 1) unpaired edges. Apply Lemma E.3 with 𝑆 = 𝑊 𝑃 0 = 𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ). So probability > 𝑛 −10 , |𝑁 (𝑆 )| ≥ 

min (𝑛 /4, |𝑆 |𝑑 /4). Observe that 𝑝𝑑 ≤ 𝑛 /4 and 𝑝 ≤ 𝑑 /4. So, 

𝑝𝑑 ≤ | 𝑁 (𝑆 )| . There are enough candidates to construct 𝑊 𝑃 1

> 20

as desired. There is no induction necessary, since this is the last waypoint level. This ends the proof for this case. 

Case 2, ℓ > 1: Note that ℓ = ⌈log 𝑝 (𝑛 /2𝑑 2)⌉ . Pick some 

𝑖 < ℓ . We inductively assume that for all 𝑗 ≤ 𝑖 , |𝑊 𝑃 𝑗 | =

(1 − 𝑜 (1)) 𝑝𝑑 𝑗 and that there are at least |𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 |𝑑 /2 unpaired edges in the construction thus far. We just proved this for the base case. At each step of the induction, there is a small probability of error ( < 1/𝑛 5). We will simply union bound all these errors over the at most ℓ = Θ(ln 𝑛 ) levels. Observe that |𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 | ≤ 𝑑𝑝 𝑖 ≤ 𝑑𝑝 log 𝑝 (𝑛 /2𝑑 2 ) ≤ 𝑛 /2𝑑 . Also, 

|𝑊 𝑃 ≤𝑖 | ≤ Í𝑗 ≤𝑖 𝑑𝑝 𝑗 = 𝑑 (𝑝 𝑖 +1 − 1)/( 𝑝 − 1). Since 𝑝 ≥ 2,

𝑝 − 1 ≥ 𝑝 /2. Hence, Í𝑗 ≤𝑖 |𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 | ≤ 𝑑𝑝 𝑖 +1/( 𝑝 /2) ≤ 2𝑑𝑝 𝑖 ≤(2 + 𝑜 (1))| 𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 |.We apply Lemma E.3 with 𝑆 = 𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 . Note that |𝑆 | ≥ 𝑑 

and |𝑆 | ≤ 𝑛 /2𝑑 . At least half of the incident half-edges are unpaired. Hence, with probability > 1 − 𝑛 −10 , |𝑁 (𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 )| ≥ |𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 |𝑑 /4. Since |𝑊 𝑃 ≤𝑖 | ≤ 2|𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 |, there are at least (𝑑 /4 −

2)| 𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 | ≥ | 𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 |𝑝 (since 𝑝 + 2 ≤ 𝑑 /4) nodes that are neigh-bors of 𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 and not in 𝑊 𝑃 ≤𝑖 . These are all candidates for 

𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 +1. Thus, we can construct 𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 +1 as desired. We get that 

|𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 +1 | = 𝑝 |𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 | = (1 ± 𝑜 (1)) 𝑑𝑝 𝑖 +1.At least (𝑑 − 4)| 𝑁 (𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 )| half-edges incident to 𝑁 (𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 )

are unpaired. It remains the bound the number of unpaired half-edges incident to 𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 +1. Observe that a uniform random node of 𝑁 (𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 ) has at least (𝑑 − 4) unpaired half-edges. Let 

𝑍 𝑟 be the random variable denoting the fraction of unpaired edges on the 𝑟 th node of 𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 +1. We have E[𝑍 𝑟 ] ≥ 1 − 𝑑 /4.Setting 𝑍 = Í𝑟 𝑍 𝑟 , E[Í𝑟 𝑍 𝑟 ] ≥ ( 1 −𝑑 /4)| 𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 +1 | by linearity of expectation. Applying Theorem D.3, Pr [𝑍 < E[𝑍 ]/ 2] ≤ 

exp (−( 1/3 · 22) · ( 1 − 𝑑 /4)| 𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 +1 |) . Since |𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 +1 | ≥ ( 1 −

𝑜 (1)) 𝑝𝑑 𝑖 +1 and 𝑖 ≥ 0, the probability is exp (− Θ(𝑑 )) ≤ 𝑛 −4.Thus, we have at least 𝑑 |𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 +1 |/ 2 unpaired half-edges in-cident to 𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 +1. We union bound over all the errors. This completes the induction, and the proof of the first bullet. 

E.1.2 The other bullets of Theorem E.1. With high prob-ability, |𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 | = (1 ± 𝑜 (1)) 𝑑𝑝 𝑖 . We will simply assume this property, and union bound the errors. Hence, the set 𝑊 𝑃 ℓ is incident to at least (1 − 𝑜 (1)) 𝑑 2𝑝 ℓ half-edges. By Claim D.4, the probability that a node is not a neighbor of 𝑊 𝑃 ℓ is at most exp (−( 1 − 𝑜 (1)) 𝑑 2𝑝 ℓ /𝑛 ) = exp (− 𝜆 (1 − 𝑜 (1))) =

(1 + 𝑜 (1)) exp (− 𝜆 ). For node 𝑣 , let 𝑋 𝑣 be the indicator ran-dom variable that 𝑣 is not a neighbor of 𝑊 𝑃 ℓ . Note that 

E[𝑋 𝑣 ] ≤ ( 1 + 𝑜 (1)) exp (− 𝜆 ).Consider the graph construction process where each 𝑣 first independently chooses to connect to 𝑊 𝑃 ℓ . Then, if possible, the graph is formed conditioned on these choices. Setting 

𝑋 = Í𝑣 𝑋 𝑣 , we can apply the Chernoff bound of Theorem D.3. So Pr [| 𝑋 − E[𝑋 ]| > 𝑛 /ln 𝑛 ] ≤ 2 exp (− 2𝑛 /ln 2 𝑛 ), which is a tiny probability. Therefore, with high probability, the number of neighbors of 𝑊 𝑃 ℓ is close to the expectation, and hence, the graph can be feasibly formed conditioned on the the choices of 𝑋 𝑣 .Thus, with high probability, the graph construction pro-cess is feasible, and the number of non-neighbors of 𝑊 𝑃 ℓ

is at most (1 + 𝑜 (1)) exp (− 𝜆 )𝑛 + 𝑛 /ln 𝑛 = exp (− 𝜆 )𝑛 + 𝑜 (𝑛 ).Observe that all nodes in 𝑂𝑅 (𝑡 ) are non-neighbors of 𝑊 𝑃 ℓ ,so this completes the proof of the second bullet. Now for the third bullet. We can bound 

𝜆 ≥ 𝑝 ⌈log 𝑝 (𝑛 /2𝑑 2 ) ⌉ 𝑑 2/𝑛 ≥ 1/2

As shown earlier, with high probability, |𝑂𝑅 (𝑡 )| ≤ ( exp (− 𝜆 )+ 

𝑜 (1)) 𝑛 ≤ 0.7𝑛 . Hence, at least 0.3𝑛 ≥ 𝑛 /4 nodes lie in the remaining levels, waypoints or 𝐼𝑅 (𝑡 ). Claim D.5 asserts that every node is a neighbor of these remaining levels with high probability. So every node is either a neighbor of a waypoint or 𝐼𝑅 (𝑡 ). Nodes in 𝑂𝑅 (𝑡 ) are by definition not neighbors of waypoints, and hence must be neighbors of 𝐼𝑅 (𝑡 ). We union bound over all the errors, each of which was < 𝑛 −5. We per-form the union bound at most 𝑛 2 log 𝑛 times (once for each source, once for each destination, and once for each level). That bounds the error probability as 𝑛 −3 log 𝑛 < 𝑛 −2.

## E.2 Path length distribution 

We now compute the distribution of Spraypoint path lengths. 

Theorem E.4. Fix a destination 𝑡 . Consider the distribution of path lengths seen by a packet sprayed uniformly at random from a uniform random source 𝑠 . With high probability, the distribution of Spraypoint paths to a destination 𝑡 is as follows: 

• There are 𝑑 paths of length 1.

• For every 2 ≤ 𝑖 ≤ ℓ + 2, there are (1 ± 𝑜 (1)) 𝑝 𝑖 −2𝑑 2 paths of length 𝑖 .

• There are at most (1 + 𝑜 (1)) exp (− 𝜆 )𝑛𝑑 paths of length 

ℓ + 4.

• All other paths have length ℓ + 3.

Proof. Consider the pointing structure. Theorem E.1 gives the sizes of each level in this structure. We will assume the bounds and statements of Theorem E.1. Imagine routing traf-fic from every possible source to the destination 𝑡 . The spray-ing step would send traffic along all edges. For each edge, let us track the length to the destination. Any edge incident to 𝑡 leads to a path of just length 1,which gives 𝑑 paths of length 1. If an edge incident to 𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 (𝑡 ),the path to the destination has length 𝑖 + 2 (one step for spraying and (𝑖 + 1) steps along the waypoints leading to 𝑡 ). Edges incident to 𝐼𝑅 (𝑡 ) lead to paths of length ℓ + 3. Finally, by Theorem E.1, observe that all nodes in 𝑂𝑅 (𝑡 ) have an edge to 𝐼𝑅 (𝑡 ) but not to any waypoints. Hence, edges incident to 

𝑂𝑅 (𝑡 ) give Spraypoint paths of length ℓ + 4. We can use the level size bounds of Theorem E.1 to complete the proof. □

The bounds in Model 7.2 are expressed as fractions. For a destination 𝑡 , there are 𝑛𝑑 possible paths to consider, one 

> 21

per source and spray operation. So we divide all the bounds in Theorem E.4 by 𝑛𝑑 to get the fractions in Model 7.2. 

## F MODELING EDGE DISJOINT PATHS 

In this section, we estimate the number of edge disjoint paths between a source 𝑠 and destination 𝑡 by estimating the min cut of Spraypoint paths between 𝑠 and 𝑡 . We first set up some notation. 

Definition F.1. For every 𝑣 ≠ 𝑡 , we define the 𝑡 -parent as: 

• For 𝑣 ∈ 𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ), the parent is 𝑡 .

• For 𝑣 ∈ 𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 (𝑡 ) (𝑖 ≥ 1): we pick ℎ uar neighbors in 

𝑊 𝑃 𝑖 −1 (𝑡 ) as the parents. 

• For 𝑣 ∈ 𝐼𝑅 (𝑡 ): we pick up to ℎ uar neighbors of 𝑣 that are waypoints (excluding {𝑡 } ∪ 𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 )). 

• For 𝑣 ∈ 𝑂𝑅 (𝑡 ): we pick ℎ random neighbors in 𝐼𝑅 (𝑡 ).(If ℎ selections cannot be made, we make the largest possible.) Recall that the routing algorithm is simple. The first step is Spraying. After that, as part of pointing, a packet is for-warded to a uar parent. Eventually, the packet reaches 𝑡 . This leads to some natural definitions of Spraypoint paths, from which we can define the graph between the endpoints. 

Definition F.2. Fix a destination 𝑡 . For any 𝑣 , the Spraypoint path to 𝑡 is any path obtained by repeatedly taking 𝑡 -parents until ending at 𝑡 .

• The pointing graph P𝑡 has all edges that forward traf-fic to 𝑡 .

• For a source-destination pair (𝑠, 𝑡 ), the Spraypoint graph S𝑠,𝑡 has all incident edges to 𝑠 and the union of Spray-point paths from 𝑁 (𝑠 ) to 𝑡 .We work with ℓ = 1 setting. We make some asymptotic as-sumptions consistent with our parameters. The assumptions allow for simpler formulas. We assume: 

• 𝑝𝑑 /𝑛 ≪ 1

• 𝜆 = 𝑝𝑑 2/𝑛 ≫ 1

• 𝑑 ≫ ln 2 𝑛 

• ℎ ≪ 𝜆 

Claim F.3. Assume that (𝑝 + 1)𝑑 < 𝑛 /ln 2 𝑛 . With proba-bility > 1 − 𝑛 −2, all nodes pick at most 𝑜 (𝑑 ) neighbors outside 

𝐼𝑅 (𝑡 ).

Proof. Fix a node 𝑣 . We will treat each of the at most 𝑑 

neighbors that 𝑣 has to pick as independent choices among 

𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ) ∪ 𝑊 𝑃 1 (𝑡 ) ∪ 𝑅 1 (𝑡 ). The probability that a neighbor lies in 𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ) ∪ 𝑊 𝑃 1 (𝑡 ) is at most |𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ) ∪ 𝑊 𝑃 1 (𝑡 )|/ 𝑛 ≤

𝑑 (𝑝 +1)/ 𝑛 ≤ 1/ln 2 𝑛 . Let 𝑋 𝑣 be the random variable denoting the number of neighbors of 𝑣 in 𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ) ∪ 𝑊 𝑃 1 (𝑡 ), which is a sum of iid Bernoullis. Note that E[𝑋 𝑣 ] ≤ 𝑑 /ln 2 𝑛 . By Theorem D.3, Pr [𝑋 𝑣 > 𝑑 /ln 𝑛 ] ≤ 2−𝑑 /ln 𝑛 . By a union bound over all vertices, the probability that any 𝑋 𝑣 > 𝑑 /ln 𝑛 is at most 𝑛 2−𝑑 /ln 𝑛 ≤ 𝑛 −2.By Theorem E.4, with probability > 1 − 𝑛 −4, the size of 

𝑂𝑅 (𝑡 ) is at most (exp (− 𝜆 ) + 𝑜 (1)) 𝑛 . The probability that 𝑣 

has a single neighbor in this set is 𝑜 (1). Using a Chernoff bound identical to the one above, the probability that 𝑣 has more than 𝛿𝑛 neighbors (for any constant 𝛿 > 0) is 𝑛 −Θ(1) .Take a union bound, with high probability, all nodes pick at most 𝑜 (𝑑 ) neighbors outside 𝐼𝑅 (𝑡 ). □

## F.1 The matching connection 

For any subset 𝑆 ⊆ 𝐼𝑅 (𝑡 ), let us construct the bipartite graph 

𝐷 𝑆 = (𝑆, 𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ), 𝐸 ) as follows. We connect 𝑠 ∈ 𝑆 to 𝑣 ∈

𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ) if 𝑠 is a descendant of 𝑣 in the pointing graph P𝑡 .

Claim F.4. For any 𝑆 ⊆ 𝐼𝑅 (𝑡 ): connect a source 𝑠 to all nodes in 𝑆 and consider the resulting pointing graph. The size of the 𝑠 -𝑡 mincut is the size of the largest matching in 𝐷 𝑆 .

Proof. We first prove that the largest matching in 𝐷 𝑆 

is at least the mincut size (say 𝑟 ). By the maxflow-mincut theorem, there is a flow of value 𝑟 from 𝑆 to 𝑡 , with unit edge capacities. By the integrality of flow, this flow consists of 

𝑟 edge disjoint paths from 𝑠 to 𝑡 . Note that each node in 𝑆 

has a single edge to 𝑠 , and every node in 𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ) has a single edge to 𝑡 . So a node in 𝑆 ∪ 𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ) participates in at most one flow path. Thus, the 𝑟 flow paths provide edge disjoint paths from 𝑆 to 𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ) in the pointing graph P𝑡 , which constitute a matching in 𝐷 𝑆 .Now, we prove that the mincut is at least the size of the largest matching in 𝐷 𝑆 . Consider a matching given by 𝜙 :

𝑆 → 𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ). For each 𝑠 ′ ∈ 𝑆 , follow a parent to 𝑊 𝑃 1 (𝑡 ), and then a parent to get to 𝜙 (𝑠 ) ∈ 𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ). For two nodes 𝑠 ′ ≠ 𝑠 ′′ 

in 𝑆 , 𝜙 (𝑠 ′) ≠ 𝜙 (𝑠 ′′ ). So the corresponding paths are edge disjoint. Hence, we can send one unit of flow on each such path, and get a flow with value at least the matching size. The maxflow value (and hence the mincut value) is at least the matching size. □

We can now connect the 𝑠 -𝑡 mincut of the Spraypoint graph S𝑠,𝑡 to matching sizes. Note that S𝑠,𝑡 is formed by adding the edges connecting 𝑠 to its neighborhood to P𝑡 .For convenience, we will only add the edges connecting 𝑠 to 

𝐼𝑅 (𝑡 ). By Claim F.3, this reduces the mincut by at most 𝑜 (𝑑 ).To bound the matching sizes, we use the following nota-tion, based on random matching sizes. 

Definition F.5. For positive integers ℓ, 𝑟, ℎ , consider the ran-dom bipartite graph 𝐻 (𝐿, 𝑅, 𝐸 ) formed as follows. We have 

|𝐿 | = ℓ, |𝑅 | = 𝑟 , and each node in 𝐿 picks ℎ uar neighbors in 

𝑅 with replacement. We use 𝜇 (ℓ, 𝑟 ; ℎ) to denote the expected maximum matching in 𝐻 .We now state our main theorem relating 𝑠 -𝑡 mincuts in 

S𝑠,𝑡 to matching sizes. 

> 22

Theorem F.6. Assume ℎ = 𝑜 (𝑑 ). The expected 𝑠 -𝑡 mincut size of S𝑠,𝑡 has the following values: 

• If 𝑠 ∈ 𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ): the size is at least 𝜇 (𝑑 − 𝑝, 𝑑 ; ℎ) ± 𝑜 (𝑑 ).

• If 𝑠 ∉ 𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ): the size is at least 𝜇 (𝑑, 𝑑 ; ℎ) ± 𝑜 (𝑑 ).

Proof. Consider 𝑠 ∈ 𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ). As discussed earlier, it picks 

𝑑 −𝑝 −1 random neighbors after conditioning on the pointing structure. By Claim F.3, at most 𝑜 (𝑑 ) of these neighbors lie outside 𝐼𝑅 (𝑡 ). So, it picks 𝑑 − 𝑝 − 1 − 𝑜 (𝑑 ) = 𝑑 − 𝑝 − 𝑜 (𝑑 )

neighbors in 𝐼𝑅 (𝑡 ). Call this set 𝑆 . By Claim F.4, the 𝑠 -𝑡 mincut size is the size of the largest matching in 𝐷 𝑆 . Each node 𝑠 ′

in 𝑆 (which is in 𝐼𝑅 (𝑡 )) picks ℎ random parents in 𝑊 𝑃 1 (𝑡 ),each of which has a parent in 𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ). (We ignore the fact that nodes in 𝑊 𝑃 1 (𝑡 ) might have multiple parents.) Thus, each 𝑠 ′ effectively picks ℎ random ancestors in 𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ). So 

𝐷 𝑆 is distributed exactly as the random bipartite graph in Definition F.5, and the expected matching size is 𝜇 (𝑑 − 𝑝 −

𝑜 (𝑑 ), 𝑑 ; ℎ). We can express this quantity as 𝜇 (𝑑 −𝑝, 𝑑 ; ℎ)± 𝑜 (𝑑 ),since changing any of the sets (in a bipartite graph) by 𝑜 (𝑑 )

can affect the matching size by at most 𝑜 (𝑑 ).Consider 𝑠 ∈ 𝑊 𝑃 1 (𝑡 ). It picks 𝑑 − 𝑜 (𝑑 ) random neighbors in 𝐼𝑅 (𝑡 ). Applying the same logic as above, the expected mincut has value 𝜇 (𝑑, 𝑑 ; ℎ) ± 𝑜 (1). For 𝑠 ∈ 𝐼𝑅 (𝑡 ), it picks 

𝑑 − ℎ − 𝑜 (𝑑 ) random neighbors in 𝐼𝑅 (𝑡 ). Since ℎ = 𝑜 (𝑑 ), 𝑠 

basically picks 𝑑 − 𝑜 (𝑑 ) random neighbors, and the value is the same as for 𝑠 ∈ 𝑊 𝑃 1 (𝑡 ). □

This theorem gives a lower bound on the size of the mincut. As mentioned in the proof, we ignore the fact that 𝑊 𝑃 1 (𝑡 )

has potentially ℎ neighbors into 𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ), and only use one of the neighbors for routing. We believe this only loses a lower order term, and so we ignore it for the sake of cleaner expressions. 

## F.2 Expressions for random matching sizes 

A good rule of thumb is that 𝜇 (𝑑, 𝑑 ; ℎ) ≈ 𝑑 (1 − exp (− ℎ)) . If 

𝑑 − 𝑝 = 𝛼𝑑 , then: 

𝜇 (𝑑 −𝑝, 𝑑 ; ℎ) = 𝜇 (𝛼𝑑, 𝑑 ; ℎ) = min 

h

𝛼𝑑, 𝑑 [1−exp (− 𝛼ℎ )] 

i

(3) For ℎ = 1, these bounds are tight. For larger ℎ, there are only upper bounds. Nevertheless, they match up quite accurately with experiments. The exact lower bound is a more complex expression given by Frieze-Mellsted [ 11 ], as explained later. We show the upper bound in the next lemma, and then give the complicated exact expression. (The proof for 𝜇 (𝛼𝑑, 𝑑 ; ℎ)

is analogous and omitted.) 

Lemma F.7. For all ℎ, 𝜇 (𝑑, 𝑑 ; ℎ) ≤ 𝑑 (1 − exp (− ℎ)) − 𝑜 (𝑑 ).Also, 𝜇 (𝑑, 𝑑 ; 1 ) = 𝑑 (1 − 1/𝑒 ) − 𝑜 (𝑑 ).

Proof. Recall that 𝜇 (𝑑, 𝑑 ; ℎ) is the expected maximum matching in the following random bipartite graph. There are two sets 𝐿, 𝑅 of size 𝑑 . Each node in 𝐿 makes ℎ random connections with 𝑅 .Consider a vertex 𝑟 ∈ 𝑅 . The probability that an edge does not connect with 𝑟 is (1 − 1/𝑑 ). The probability that no edge makes a connection is (1 − 1/𝑑 )𝑑ℎ , since there are 𝑑ℎ random (multi)edges in the graph. Since 1 − 𝑥 ≥ exp (− 𝑥 − 𝑥 2), we lower bound this probability by exp (−( 1/𝑑 + 1/𝑑 2) · 𝑑ℎ ) =

exp (− ℎ)( 1 − Θ(ℎ/𝑑 )) .Consider indicator random variable 𝑋 𝑟 for 𝑟 having degree zero. By linearity of expectation and the calculation above, 

E[Í𝑟 ∈𝑅 𝑋 𝑟 ] = Í𝑟 ∈𝑅 E[𝑋 𝑟 ] ≥ 𝑑 exp (− ℎ) − 𝑜 (𝑑 ). We can also upper bound (1−1/𝑑 ) ≤ 𝑒𝑥𝑝 (− 1/𝑑 ), and get the lower bound 

𝑑 exp (− ℎ). Thus, the expected number of degree zero nodes in 𝑅 is 𝑑 exp (− ℎ) ± 𝑜 (𝑑 ). These nodes cannot be matched, and hence the matching size is at most 𝑑 (1 − exp (− ℎ)) ± 𝑜 (𝑑 ).When ℎ = 1, we can match this bound. Take the iterative process that picks an arbitrary node in 𝑅 with non-zero de-gree, and matches it arbitrarily to some neighbor in 𝐿 . Then, we delete this node and its neighbors from the graph, and iterate. When 𝑟 ∈ 𝑅 is removed, it removes its neighbors in 𝐿 .Since they all have degree 1, all edges removed are incident to 𝑟 . Hence, degrees of other nodes in 𝑅 are unaffected. All in all, every node of non-zero degree in 𝑅 gets matched. □

The Frieze-Mellsted bound: The optimal value of lim 𝑑 →∞ 

𝜇 (𝑑, 𝑑 ; ℎ)/ 𝑑 was computed in [ 11 ]. We state the bound here, and show that it is fairly close to the simpler expression of Lemma F.7. (Refer to Thm. 3 of [ 11 ].) Let 𝑧 ∗ be the largest non-negative solution of (𝑧 /ℎ)1/( ℎ−1) + exp (− 𝑧 ) + 1 = 0. Then, 

lim  

> 𝑑 →∞

𝜇 (𝑑, 𝑑 ; ℎ)/ 𝑑 = 2 − ( 1 − exp (− 𝑧 ∗)) ℎ

−( 1 + 𝑧 ∗) exp (− 𝑧 ∗) (4) 

≈ 1 − ( 1 + 𝑧 ∗ − ℎ) exp (− 𝑧 ∗) (5) For ℎ = 2, the bound is ≈ 0.838 , while the bound of Lemma F.7 is ≈ 0.865 . For ℎ = 4, the bound is ≈ 0.979 , while the bound of Lemma F.7 is ≈ 0.982 . As ℎ becomes larger, 𝑧 ∗ tends to ℎ,and the bound above tends to 1 − exp (− ℎ).

## F.3 The mincut bound, summarized 

We summarize the bounds in this section. Fix a destination 𝑡 .The 𝑠 -𝑡 mincut value of the Spraypoint graph S𝑠,𝑡 is given by the following formulas: 

• For most 𝑠 , the average mincut is 𝑑 (1 − exp (− ℎ)) .

• The lowest (expected) mincut occurs for 𝑠 ∈ 𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ). In that case, setting 𝑑 −𝑝 = 𝛼𝑑 , the bound is min 

h

𝛼𝑑, 𝑑 [1−

exp (− 𝛼ℎ )] 

i

. When 𝛼 is close to 1, the bound is close to 𝑑 (1 − exp (− ℎ)) .To get a sense of the benefits of ℎ, we plug in different values. The best possible mincut is 𝑑 . Let us see what fraction of 𝑑 

> 23

is achieved. For ℎ = 1, we get a 1 − 1/𝑒 ≈ 0.63 fraction. For 

ℎ = 2, we get a 1 − exp (− 2) ≈ 0.86 fraction. For ℎ = 4, we get a 1 − exp (− 4) ≈ 0.98 fraction. At this point, the statistical variation of the mincut value is bigger than any potential improvements. The following table gives the various fractions. Note that 

𝑝 = 0 gives the bound for most 𝑠 .

𝑝 ℎ = 1 ℎ = 2 ℎ = 40 0.63 0.86 0.98 

𝑑 /4 0.53 0.75 0.75 

𝑑 /3 0.49 0.66 0.66 

𝑑 /2 0.39 0.5 0.5

## G MODELING OVERSUBSCRIPTION 

To help us characterize stochastic oversubscription, we set up some notation and definitions. We set up a multicommodity flow problem. Each edge of the graph 𝐺 = (𝑉 , 𝐸 ) is treated as two directed arcs, one in each direction. The capacity of each arc is one. There is a doubly stochastic demand matrix 

𝑀 that specifies that amount of flow that each source needs to send to each destination. So 𝑀 𝑠,𝑡 is the amount of flow that 𝑠 needs to send to 𝑡 . The total flow in or out of any node is at most one since 𝑀 is doubly stochastic. 

Definition G.1. (1) A demand matrix 𝑁 is a feasible ma-trix if the multicommodity flow specified by 𝑁 can be routed while honoring link capacity constraints. (2) The demand multiplier of a doubly stochastic demand matrix 𝑀 , de-noted 𝑐 (𝑀 ), is the largest 𝑐 such that 𝑐𝑀 can be satisfied. (3) The oversubscription ratio (oversub) is the value of 

max 𝑀 𝑑 /𝑐 (𝑀 ).Thus, the oversub is the scaled reciprocal of the lowest possible demand multiplier. Our first lemma connects the oversub to the fraction of optimal flow along different lengths. 

Lemma G.2. Consider the traffic matrix 𝑀 that achieves the oversub bound. For the corresponding optimal flow, let 𝛿 𝑖 be the fraction of the flow that takes length 𝑖 paths. Then, the oversub is at least Í𝑖 𝑖𝛿 𝑖 .

Proof. The proof goes via a simple “total capacity" argu-ment. Suppose the oversub is 𝜔 . This means that the corre-sponding demand multiplier is 𝑑 /𝜔 , which is the total flow that each node sends/receives. The total flow in the network is 𝑛𝑑 /𝜔 , since each node is a source. Let us bound the sum 𝐹 := Íarc 𝑒 𝑓 𝑒 , where 𝑓 𝑒 is the total flow on the arc 𝑒 . By definition, the amount of flow along length 𝑖 paths is 𝛿 𝑖 𝑛𝑑 /𝜔 . Observe that this flow takes up 

𝑖𝛿 𝑖 𝑛𝑑 /𝜔 capacity. Thus, the contribution of this flow to the sum 𝐹 is 𝑖𝛿 𝑖 𝑛𝑑 /𝜔 , and we bound 𝐹 = Í𝑖 𝑖𝛿 𝑖 𝑛𝑑 /𝜔 .Since each arc has unit capacity and there are 𝑛𝑑 arcs, 

𝐹 ≤ 𝑛𝑑 . So Í𝑖 𝛿 𝑖 𝑛𝑑 /𝜔 ≤ 𝑛𝑑 and 𝜔 ≥ 𝑖 Í𝑖 𝛿 𝑖 . □

## G.1 Principles underlying the model 

Based on Lemma G.2, we will devise a model for oversub in the next section as a function of system parameters, 𝑛, 𝑑, 𝑝, ℎ .The model is based on a number of principles. 

The greedy shorter path principle: The oversub lower bound of Lemma G.2 is Í𝑖 𝑖𝛿 𝑖 , so it is preferable to have larger values of 𝛿 𝑖 for small 𝑖 , rather than the other way around. Based on this intuition, we construct the demand multipliers for a demand matrix by greedily maximizing the amount of flow on shorter paths first. For the ℓ = 1 setting, all flows paths have length between 1 to 5 (Theorem E.4). We can ignore path length 1, which form a neglible fraction of paths. The main calculations compute the maximum amount of flow that goes along paths of length 2, then conditioned on that, maximize flow along paths of length 3, so on and so forth. We compute 𝜇 2, 𝜇 3, 𝜇 4, and 𝜇 5 defined as follows. The average amount of flow that a source sends along length 𝑖 

paths is 𝜇 𝑖 𝑑 . The total demand multiplier is (𝜇 2 +𝜇 3 +𝜇 4 +𝜇 5)𝑑 ,and hence the oversub is (𝜇 2 + 𝜇 3 + 𝜇 4 + 𝜇 5)−1.

The average case principle: By Theorem 2.1 of [ 34 ], the worst-case traffic matrix is a permutation matrix, which is a perfect matching of source to sinks. We will actually analyze the average demand multiplier, and hence oversub, of a ran-dom permutation matrix. In many problems in random graph theory, the worst-case behavior can be shown to be close to the average-case behavior. Specifically, suppose an adversary picks a traffic matrix and then we choose the graph 𝐺 . We can compute the probability that the demand multiplier de-viates significantly from the average value. If this probability is small enough (like < 𝑛 −𝑛 ), we could union bound over all permutation matrices. This means, that with non-trivial probability, a random graph will have high demand multipli-ers for all permutation matrices. This is a common paradigm in random graph/matrix theory: show that the probability of large deviations from average are exponentially small, and then union bound over all the exponential possibilities (proof of expansion of random graphs, Chap. 5 of [31]). 

The random deletion principle: Once (say) we have de-termined 𝜇 2, this flow uses up some capacity. When comput-ing 𝜇 3, the capacity constraints have changed. We consider a simplified model for the change. The length 2 flow uses up 

2𝜇 2𝑛𝑑 capacity from the network, so we assume that each edge is fully congested with probability 2𝜇 2𝑛𝑑 /𝑛𝑑 = 2𝜇 2. We delete these edges, since they are unavailable to carry flow. This deletion principle is less accurate for larger length flows. Larger length flows do not use up the capacity of constituent edges. Hence, for most calculations, we will only assume this principle for smaller length flows. 

The viable path principle: For any length 𝑖 , we esti-mate the number of paths of length 𝑖 that can be used for routing. For concreteness, for the remaining principles, we 

> 24

will consider length 3 (the first non-trivial case). Such a path goes 𝑠 → 𝑊 𝑃 1 (𝑡 ) → 𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ) → 𝑡 . Theorem E.4 tells us how many neighbors of 𝑠 lead to such paths (in this case, it is 

𝑝𝑑 2/𝑛 for an average source 𝑠 ). Because of the deletion prin-ciple, some of these edges (from 𝑠 to 𝑊 𝑃 1 (𝑡 )) get deleted. Consider some 𝑣 ∈ 𝑊 𝑃 1 (𝑡 ) such that (𝑠, 𝑣 ) is not deleted. The pointing paths from 𝑣 to 𝑡 may get removed after the deletions. We need to model the probability of this event. The parameter ℎ ensures that each 𝑣 has ℎ (edge disjoint) pointing paths to 𝑡 . We calculate the probability that some path survives the deletion. Putting it all together, we can es-timate the number of paths of length 3 that allow for routing. The next principles account for the intersections/congestion among these paths, from which we compute the flow that can be sent along these paths. 

The unique position principle: By the mincut bounds of Lemma F.7, there should be enough edge disjoint paths length between a given source-destination pair to carry the desired flow. (We do not expect an oversub less than 2, so even an mincut of 𝑑 /2 suffices for a source-destination pair.) Consider the entire collection of edge disjoint length 3 paths, over all source-destination pairs. Congestion occurs because some edges are present among length 3 paths for multiple source-destination pair. The concept of position helps us bound the congestion. For a path, an edge has one of three positions: first, middle, or last. An edge (𝑢, 𝑣 ) cannot be in the first position for more than one path. When (𝑢, 𝑣 ) is the first edge, 𝑢 must be the source, and all length 3 paths from 𝑢 (in the collection) are edge disjoint. Similarly, an edge cannot be in the last position for more than one path. Extrapolating, we assume that no edge can be in a specific position for more than one path. (This is technically false, since an edge could be in the middle for multiple paths, but we believe this only leads to a lower order term.) Overall, for length 3, an edge can participate in at most 3 flow paths of length 3. Similarly, we assume that for length 𝑖 , an edge participates in at most 𝑖 flow paths, one in each position. 

The binomial congestion principle: We want to com-pute the amount of flow along length 3 paths to estimate 𝜇 3.Using the viable path principle, suppose we determine that there are 𝜙 3𝑑 edge disjoint paths of length 3 between every source-destination pair. Consider the total collection of 𝜙 3𝑛𝑑 

paths. We want to model, for a given edge, the number of paths that this edge participates in. This is the congestion on that edge, focusing only on length 3 flow. By the unique po-sition principle, the congestion is at most 3. We will assume that an edge is present in a particular position independently with probability 𝜙 3. Consider an edge on a particular length 3

path. It already occupies a position on this path, and can take up two other positions (on different paths). The congestion on the edge is distributed as the binomial 𝐵 (2, 𝜙 3) + 1 (the binomial 𝐵 (2, 𝜙 3) is the sum of 2 independent 0-1 random variables with expectation 𝜙 3) plus one. 

The reciprocal principle: On each edge of the path, using the binomial model, we have a distribution for the number of other paths that use this edge. The maximum value among all the edges of the path is the congestion of the path. We use the following simple claim to get a flow bound. 

Claim G.3. Consider a family P of paths. For each path in 𝑃 ∈ P , let 𝑐 (𝑃 ) be the congestion of 𝑃 among the paths 

P. (So 𝑐 (𝑃 ) is the maximum, among all edges of 𝑃 , of the number of paths that use the edge.) Then each path 𝑃 ∈ P can simultaneously route 1/𝑐 (𝑃 ) units of flow without violating the (unit) capacity constraints. 

Proof. Suppose every path 𝑃 ∈ P routes 1/𝑐 (𝑃 ) units of flow. Consider any edge 𝑒 that is contained in path 𝑃 1, 𝑃 2, . . . , 𝑃 𝑘 .The congestion of 𝑒 , denoted 𝑐 (𝑒 ), is 𝑘 . Observe that for ev-ery path 𝑃 𝑖 , 𝑐 (𝑃 𝑖 ) ≥ 𝑐 (𝑒 ) = 𝑘 . The total amount of flow in 𝑒 

is Í𝑖 ≤𝑘 1/𝑐 (𝑃 𝑖 ) ≤ Í𝑖 ≤𝑘 1/𝑐 (𝑒 ) = Í𝑖 ≤𝑘 1/𝑘 = 1. □

This claim allows us to get the total flow that can be sent along, say, length 3 paths. Over these paths, we have com-puted the distribution of congestion. The average value of the reciprocal of the congestion is the average flow that can be sent along paths of this length. We multiply this average by the total number of paths to get the total flow. To move to the next path length, we use the random dele-tion principle to delete edges that are used by this flow. We run this entire calculation again for the next path length. For larger paths lengths 𝑖 (like 4 and above), the congestion values of the paths are quite close to their maximum value 𝑖 .So we just send 1/𝑖 units of flow along paths of these length. This simplification helps us avoid complicated probability calculations that are lower order terms. 

## G.2 The oversub formula 

We now compute the formula based on the principles above. Given the parameters, 𝑛 , 𝑑 , 𝑝 , and ℎ, the final formula is a polynomial function of 𝑝 and 𝑑 /𝑛 , with exponential depen-dencies on ℎ. There are minor corrections needed for extreme parameter settings (when 𝑑 is comparable to 𝑛 , or 𝑝 is close to 𝑑 ). As discussed earlier, we will estimate 𝜇 2, 𝜇 3, 𝜇 4, and 𝜇 5.

𝜇 2: By Theorem E.4, for a given destination 𝑡 , a typical source 𝑠 would have a 𝑑 /𝑛 fraction of its neighbors in 𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ).The total number of such paths from 𝑠 to 𝑡 is 𝑑 2/𝑛 and the total number of edges on these paths is 2𝑑 2/𝑛 . As a fraction of the total number of arcs (directed edges), we get 2𝑑 /𝑛 (=

(2𝑑 2/𝑛 ) · 𝑛 /𝑛𝑑 ). We typically assume that 2𝑑 ≪ 𝑛 . Assuming that an edge is present on these paths with probability 2𝑑 /𝑛 ,the probability that an edge is on two (or more) paths is 

(2𝑑 /𝑛 )2, which is negligible. So we assume that no edge is present on two of these paths, or equivalently, the congestion 

> 25

of every path/edge is at most one. So all the length 2 paths across all source-destination pairs are edge disjoint. Each such path can carry one unit of flow, so 𝑠 can send 𝑑 2/𝑛 units of flow along length 2 paths to 𝑡 . Thus, 𝜇 2 = 𝑑 /𝑛 𝜇 3: This is where most of the work goes. By the unique position principle and the random deletion principle, each edge has probability 𝜇 2 of being in the first position of a length 2 flow path. (Same for the last position.) So we will delete a 𝜇 2 fraction of edges (for the first position), and delete another 𝜇 2 fraction for the last position. We now estimate the number of length 3 paths that can be used to route flow. We compute a fraction 𝜙 3 such that each source-destination pair has 𝜙 3𝑑 viable length 3 paths to route flow. By Theorem E.4, a typical source 𝑠 has a 𝑝𝑑 /𝑛 = 𝑝𝜇 2

fraction of neighbors in 𝑊 𝑃 1 (𝑡 ). (For extreme large values of 𝑝 , 𝑝𝜇 2 could be larger than one, so we “correct" by making this fraction min (𝑝𝜇 2, 1 − 𝜇 2). The latter term just assumes that everything that is not in 𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ) is in 𝑊 𝑃 1 (𝑡 ).) Of these corresponding edges incident to 𝑠 , some of them might be in the last position of a length 2 flow. They cannot be in the first position, since all first position edges go from 𝑠 to 

𝑁𝑏𝑟 (𝑡 ), while these edges under consideration go from 𝑠 to 

𝑊 𝑃 1 (𝑡 ). By the deletion principle, we expect a 𝜇 2-fraction of the edges to be deleted. So we get that a min (𝑝𝜇 2, 1 − 𝜇 2) · ( 1 − 𝜇 2) fraction of neighbors of a source 𝑠 lead to length 3 paths to the corre-sponding destination 𝑡 . Consider such a neighbor 𝑣 of 𝑠 that is in 𝑊 𝑃 1 (𝑡 ). It has ℎ pointing (likely edge disjoint) paths of length 2 to the destination 𝑡 . Each edge gets deleted with independent probability 2𝜇 2, so a path survives with prob-ability (1 − 2𝜇 2)2 ≈ 1 − 4𝜇 2 (assuming 𝜇 2 << 1). The path gets removed with probability ≈ 4𝜇 2. The probability that at least one of ℎ edge disjoint paths survives is 1 − ( 4𝜇 2)ℎ .Overall, the probability that 𝑣 ∈ 𝑊 𝑃 1 (𝑡 ) still has a path to 𝑡 

is 1 − ( 4𝜇 2)ℎ .Combining with the number of such 𝑣 ’s, we get that there are 𝜙 3𝑑 neighbors of 𝑠 that lead to viable 3 length flows, where: 

𝜙 3 = min (𝑝𝜇 2, 1 − 𝜇 2) · ( 1 − 𝜇 2) · ( 1 − ( 4𝜇 2)ℎ ) (6) Our next step is to deal with the congestion. Consider a length 3 flow path. Each edge on this path could potentially take up two other positions (on different paths), using the unique position principle. The congestion on the path is the maximum of three independently chosen random variables according to the shifted binomial 𝐵 (2, 𝜙 3) + 1.

Claim G.4. Define 𝑌 := max (𝑋 1, 𝑋 2, 𝑋 3), where each 𝑋 𝑖 

is independently chosen from 𝐵 (2, 𝜙 3). Then, Pr [𝑌 = 0] =

(1 − 𝜙 3)6, Pr [𝑌 = 1] = [( 1 − 𝜙 23 )3 − ( 1 − 𝜙 3)6], and Pr [𝑌 =

2] = [1 − ( 1 − 𝜙 23 )3].

Proof. We can treat each binomial as the sum of two independent Bernoullis, each with parameter 𝜙 3. For 𝑌 to be zero, all the Bernoullis need to take value zero. This happens with probability (1 − 𝜙 3)6.Each 𝑋 𝑖 takes value 2 with probability 𝜙 23 . The probability that no 𝑋 𝑖 takes value 2 is (1 − 𝜙 23 )3. Thus, Pr [𝑌 = 2] =

[1 − ( 1 − 𝜙 23 )3].We deduce Pr [𝑌 = 1] as 1 − Pr [𝑌 = 0] − Pr [𝑌 = 2], and applying the above formulas. □

The congestion on a path is distributed as 𝑌 + 1, where 

𝑌 is distributed as in Claim G.4. As discussed in the earlier section, the average flow that can be sent is E[1/( 𝑌 + 1)] .Using Claim G.4, this average can be computed easily: 

𝜅 3 = (1 − 𝜙 3)6 + [( 1 − 𝜙 23 )3 − ( 1 − 𝜙 3)6]/ 2

+[ 1 − ( 1 − 𝜙 23 )3]/ 3 (7) Finally, we set 𝜇 3 = 𝜙 3𝜅 3.

𝜇 4 and 𝜇 5: We create variables for the relative sizes of the Spraypoint levels, based on Theorem E.4. 

𝜎 4 = 1 − ( 𝑝 + 1)𝑑 /𝑛 − exp (− 𝑝𝑑 2/𝑛 ) 𝜎 5 = exp (− 𝑝𝑑 2/𝑛 ) (8) Let us start with 𝜇 4. The quantity 𝜎 4 is the fraction of 𝑠 ’s neighbors that lead to a length 4 flow path. The probability that these corresponding edges are removed by previous flows is 𝜇 2 + 2𝜇 3. (This edge can take up the last position in length 2 flows, and the middle or last position in length 3

flows.) Consider a neighbor 𝑣 of 𝑠 leading to length 4 path. As in the previous 𝜇 3 calculations, we need to compute the probability that 𝑣 still has a path to 𝑡 after the deletions. We will model 𝑣 ’s pointing paths as follows. It has ℎ neighbors in 

𝑊 𝑃 1 (𝑡 ), each of which has ℎ edge disjoint paths to 𝑡 . Since we are considering longer paths, we will go with the weaker deletion principle of removing edges with probability 2𝜇 2.The probability that 𝑣 still has a path to 𝑡 can be approximated as 𝛽 , defined below. 

𝛽 = 1 − [ 1 − ( 1 − 2𝜇 2)( 1 − ( 4𝜇 2)ℎ )] ℎ (9) The fraction of viable paths is 𝜙 4 = 𝜎 4𝛽 . For paths of length 

4, we will simply assume the worst case congestion of 4, so we can only send 1/4 units of flow on each path. So we set 

𝜅 4 = 1/4 and 𝜇 4 = 𝜎 4𝜅 4 = 𝜎 4𝛽 (1 − 𝜇 2 − 2𝜇 3)/ 4.For 𝜇 5, we only look at deletions incident to the source 

𝑠 . This is because there will be many paths (polynomial in 

ℎ) from a neighbor of 𝑠 (in 𝑂𝑅 (𝑡 )) to the destination 𝑡 . The odds are quite high that some path will still be available for routing, so we do not bother to model it carefully. Following the logic for 𝜇 4, we estimate 𝜇 5 = 𝜎 4 (1 − 𝜇 2 − 2𝜇 3 − 3𝜇 4)/ 5.Let 𝜇 + 

> 𝑖

= max (𝜇 𝑖 , 0). This deals with extreme situations ( 𝑛 

is too small, 𝑝 or 𝑑 are large). Finally, our oversub bound is 

(𝜇 + 

> 2

+ 𝜇 + 

> 3

+ 𝜇 + 

> 4

+ 𝜇 + 

> 5

)−1 (10)