Title: Unsupervised Cross-Protocol Anomaly Analysis in Mobile Core Networks via Multi-Embedding Models Consensus

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.15344v1

Published Time: Tue, 17 Mar 2026 04:30:57 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
# Unsupervised Cross-Protocol Anomaly Analysis in Mobile Core Networks via Multi-Embedding Models Consensus 

Aayush Garg 

Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology 

aayush.garg@list.lu 

Orlando Amaral Cejas 

Luxembourg Institute of Science and Technology 

orlando.amaral-cejas@list.lu 

Abstract —Mobile core networks rely on several signalling protocols in parallel, such as SS7, Diameter, and GTP, hence many security-relevant problems only become visible when their interactions are analyzed jointly. Moreover, labeled examples of real attacks and cross-protocol misconfigurations are scarce, which complicates the deployment of supervised detection meth-ods. Motivated by these constraints, we study unsupervised cross-protocol anomaly analysis on fused representations that combine SS7, Diameter, and GTP signalling. We first combine SS7, Diameter, and GTP messages for each subscriber into per-minute fused records. We then serialize each fused record as text, obtain vector representations from several embedding models, and finally apply unsupervised anomaly detection. A consensus score is then assigned to each record as the number of embedding models that flag it as anomalous. For evaluation, we construct cross-protocol-plausible synthetic anomalies by swapping one chosen field group at a time between pairs of records, so that each signalling message remains valid in isolation while the fused cross-protocol view becomes contradictory. From our experiments, we observe that the fraction of flagged records decreases sharply as the required level of model agreement increases. On a corpus of 219,294 fused records, 44.15% are flagged by at least one model, yet only 0.97% reach full agreement of all six models. Across consensus levels, we find that high agreement is tightly coupled to the synthetic records that encode cross-protocol inconsistencies. For k = 1 − 4, the odds that a flagged record is synthetic are hundreds of times larger than for original records, and for k ≥ 5 all flagged records are synthetic, with extremely small p-values indicating statistical significance. To further analyze how the models structure their decisions, we measure cosine distances in embedding space between synthetic and original records. We observe that these distances increase with the consensus level, suggesting that records on which the models agree more strongly tend to be more clearly separated from original traffic in embedding space. Taken together, these results support the use of multi-embedding models consensus to enable prioritization of a much smaller candidate set of cross-protocol inconsistencies for further inspection. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Mobile core networks operate several signalling protocols at the same time, including Signaling System 7 (SS7), Diameter, and GPRS Tunneling Protocol (GTP). Many security-relevant problems only become visible when these protocols are viewed together for the same subscriber and time window [1], [2]. A few examples are identity inconsistencies across protocols, false roaming indications, misrouting, and collisions in session or tunnel identifiers [3], [4], where per-protocol rules often miss these issues [5]. Moreover, labeled data of real attacks and cross-protocol misconfigurations are rarely available in op-erational settings [6], [7]. Hence, in this study, we address the gap between per-protocol monitoring and the cross-protocol reality of operations. In practice, operators need methods that compare information carried in SS7, Diameter, and GTP for the same subscriber and minute, so that records that appear normal in isolation are examined jointly for contradictions [1], [2]. At the same time, the method should avoid proprietary schemas, work on exported signalling messages, and require no human labels during model fitting or threshold selection. Therefore, our objective is to reveal cross-protocol inconsisten-cies that are invisible in single-protocol views, using methods that require no labeled incidents for model fitting. Rule-driven monitoring focuses on single protocols and re-lies on expert-crafted signatures that require frequent updates, which limits coverage for novel or multi-step issues. Prior studies on intrusion detection report that signature-based meth-ods are effective for known threats but struggle with previously unseen patterns and need continuous rule maintenance [8]. Operators and vendors increasingly emphasize correlation across SS7, Diameter, and GTP protocols to detect issues that a single-protocol view may miss, including cross-protocol attacks and routing inconsistencies [9]. Additionally, super-vised learning-based methods depend on labeled incidents at scale, yet labeled examples are scarce and widely used datasets present gaps and limitations for training and evaluation [10]. These constraints motivate unsupervised analysis over learned representations that compare SS7, Diameter, and GTP records for the same subscriber and time window without requiring expert annotation or per-protocol rule engineering [11]. Adopting this direction, our approach combines SS7, Diam-eter, and GTP messages per subscriber and minute to obtain per-minute fused records. We serialize each fused record to text, and obtain vectorized representations via different embedding models. For each model, unsupervised detectors determine whether the record is unusual, and the number of models in agreement defines a consensus score. To evalu-ate without manual labels, we create cross-protocol-plausible synthetic anomalies via mutation. To mutate, we swap one chosen field group at a time, such as a routing address/number (SS7 Global Title), session identifier (Diameter Session ID), 

> arXiv:2603.15344v1 [cs.CR] 16 Mar 2026

visited-network/location (PLMN or related location codes), etc. between pairs of records. Each signalling message remains valid on its own, while the fused view becomes contradictory. Our evaluation yields the following empirical observations. First, in a set of 219 , 294 fused records, 96 , 819 (i.e., 44 .15% )are flagged as anomalous by at least one of the six models, whereas only 2, 120 (i.e., 0.97% ) are flagged by all six models. Second, when we treat the consensus level k as a ranking variable, stricter thresholds sharply reduce the fraction of records flagged as anomalous, while strongly supporting cross-protocol-plausible synthetic anomalies. For k = 1 − 4, flagged records are hundreds of times more likely to be synthetic than original, and for k ≥ 5 all flagged records are synthetic. Third, cosine-distance measurements in embedding space show that distances between synthetic and original records increase with the model-consensus level, suggesting that records with higher model agreement, i.e., synthetic anomalous records are more clearly separated from original traffic in embedding space. Taken together, these results support the use of multi-embedding models consensus to enable prioritization of a much smaller candidate set of cross-protocol inconsistencies for further inspection in mobile core networks. Specifically, we make the following contributions in this paper: 1) We present a fusion pipeline that aggregates SS7, Di-ameter, and GTP records per subscriber and minute and preserves fields needed for cross-protocol checks. 2) We introduce a synthetic anomaly generator that uses single-field swaps to create cross-protocol-plausible in-consistencies for evaluation without manual labeling. 3) We design an unsupervised ensemble that combines multiple embedding models and per-model detectors into a consensus score for ranking. 4) We provide an evaluation method that relates consensus to precision on synthetic cross-protocol anomalies and shows separation of high-consensus records in embed-ding space. The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Sec-tion II reviews related work. Section III formalizes the problem and the cross-protocol consistency expectations. Section IV describes the methodology, including the fusion pipeline, construction of synthetic anomalies, text serialization, unsu-pervised detectors, and the consensus score. Section V details the datasets, embedding models, detection method employed, and our evaluation method. Section VI reports empirical results, including agreement statistics, precision as a function of the consensus threshold, and embedding-space analyses. Section VII states the threats to the validity of our work. Finally, the conclusion is presented in section VIII. II. R ELATED WORK 

The research on signalling security in mobile core networks has evolved along three converging areas: (i) protocol-specific defenses aimed at mitigating spoofing, tunnelling abuse, and signalling fraud, (ii) rule-based and supervised learning de-tectors that encode known message sequences or rely on labelled attack data, and (iii) unsupervised models that learn latent representations of normal behaviour to expose novel anomalies. Below, we present an overview of these three research lines applied to SS7, Diameter, and GTP protocols. 

A. SS7 Protocol 

In their work, Afzal and Murugesan [12] propose a hybrid rule-correlation engine for SS7, combining protocol seman-tics with stateful message tracking. However, the framework depends heavily on manual rule creation and cannot detect coordinated multi-protocol or temporal anomalies. Similarly, 

Guo et al. [2] present a comprehensive empirical analy-sis of machine learning for SS7 anomaly detection. Their work emphasizes the advantage of representation learning for sequence-structured SS7 messages and shows robustness to unseen attack variants similar to existing works in anomaly detection [13], [14]. However, their evaluation is restricted to isolated SS7 traffic, without correlation to other protocols. In their paper, Ermis ¸ et al. [15] introduce a convolutional semi-supervised model to detect SS7 attacks in roaming scenarios. Their semi-supervised design is notable for cross-protocol contexts, where labelled datasets are scarce, making their training paradigm a relevant design reference. Additionally, Xu et al. [16] present a detailed mapping of SS7 attack vectors and propose feature extraction methods for location-tracking, in-terception, and DoS detection. The authors stress that context-aware correlation between SS7 and IP-based signaling could enhance detection, but they restrict their experiments to legacy SS7 core components. Moreover, with their research, Macedo et al. [17] consolidates known SS7 vulnerabilities, categorizing them by functional plane, e.g., authentication, mobility, rout-ing. The authors advocate for integrating SS7 monitoring with newer protocols such as Diameter and GTP, providing explicit motivation for cross-protocol anomaly detection architectures. 

B. Diameter Protocol 

In their survey, Mavoungou et al. [18] cover mobile net-work security from GSM to LTE, providing a consolidated taxonomy of control-plane attacks, including those exploiting Diameter. It discusses anomaly detection approaches (e.g., signature, statistical, ML-based) and highlights the difficulty of obtaining labelled datasets across protocols. In their research, 

Carlson [19] develops a penetration-testing and monitoring framework for the Diameter protocol. The author demonstrated the feasibility of spoofing and message manipulation attacks over IP interconnects. Moreover, in their article, Mshukov et al. [20] summarize the results of real security audits of multi-ple mobile network operators, describing successful attacks on Diameter protocol implementations, i.e., IMSI retrieval, subscriber DoS, location attacks, vendor-specific AVP/ordering weaknesses. In their work, Tan et al. [21] shift detection focus to end-devices, monitoring abnormal signaling patterns trig-gered by compromised Diameter peers, employing lightweight client-side anomaly detection for user-DoS attacks and au-thentication attacks, exploiting Diameter signalling in 4G LTE core networks. Although device-centric, their work highlights the value of multi-point visibility (network and device), and focuses on detection of Diameter-based attacks using labelled attack scenarios. Similarly, Holtmanns et al. [22] analyze how legacy signalling attacks can be ported via an interworking function to 4G LTE networks using Diameter-based signalling. 

C. GTP Protocol 

In their research, Park et al. [23] explore real threats exploiting GTP in a 4G mobile grid-computing setup, i.e., LTE/EPC networks. The authors identify various attack classes (e.g., tunnel injection, TEID spoofing, session hijacking) and propose detection/mitigation algorithms using traffic signa-tures and behavioural heuristics. While the authors do not employ machine-learning-based anomaly detection, the paper offers empirical evidence of GTP-specific misuse, tunnel-level features (e.g., TEID patterns, message length distributions) and countermeasures. This study highlights the under-studied nature of GTP flows compared to SS7 and Diameter, and the opportunity to integrate GTP-level anomalies into a unified framework. Besides, Kim et al. [24] propose ML classifiers (i.e., random forest, SVM, ANN) for detecting IoT botnets in 5G networks using GTP-U traffic features. The results illus-trate the limitations of single-protocol, flow-based ML models and the potential benefits of correlating with signalling context. Similarly, Park et al. [25] use supervised ML (i.e., random forest, k-NN, XGBoost) to detect signalling DDoS attacks in 5G standalone cores. However, their approach assumes full visibility and lacks consideration of inter-protocol causal chains. Furthermore, Pineda et al. [26] address the user-plane dimension by introducing an SDN-based telemetry framework for GTP-U traffic analysis in 5G cores. The paper focuses on monitoring and per-protocol traffic profiling rather than cross-protocol correlation or unsupervised representation learning. In general, prior work has achieved high precision within isolated protocols, it rarely addresses inconsistencies that emerge across signalling layers, where attacks often traverse all SS7, Diameter, and GTP in coordinated chains. The depen-dence on protocol-specific features and scarce labelled datasets limits generalization and adaptability in live networks. Rule-based systems excel at deterministic enforcement of signalling logic but fail to detect coordinated or previously unseen behaviours. More recent unsupervised and representation-learning approaches alleviate this dependence by modelling normal traffic distributions, yet they are typically confined to a single protocol and overlook causal dependencies across the control and user planes. Consequently, security analytics remain fragmented, with detectors tuned to protocol syntax rather than the semantics of end-to-end subscriber sessions. These identified gaps motivate our design of a cross-protocol anomaly analysis framework that employs joint representations of multi-protocol signalling flows, enabling a unified view and candidate ranking without requiring exhaustive labelling or per-protocol tuning. Our work addresses this fragmentation by correlating SS7, Diameter, and GTP features within a shared embedding space through an unsupervised, multi-model consensus ensemble. This method enables a holistic analysis of multi-protocol inconsistencies that become visible only when records are viewed jointly. Our approach builds upon comple-mentary advances by combining multi-protocol signalling data within a shared embedding space and enabling unsupervised analysis and prioritization of cross-protocol inconsistencies. III. P ROBLEM STATEMENT 

We study cross-protocol inconsistencies that arise when SS7, Diameter, and GTP signalling messages are viewed jointly, for the same subscriber and minute. For each fused record (i.e., all messages for one subscriber in a one-minute window), the goal is to decide whether the information carried across protocols is mutually consistent under normal opera-tion. We consider core consistency expectations that operators enforce implicitly (or explicitly), including stable subscriber identity across protocols, compatible visited-network and lo-cation indicators, unique and non-conflicting session or tun-nel references, coherent routing addresses or numbers, and agreement between the access point in use and the subscribed profile. Below, we provide the details of expectations that guide the decision for a fused record.  

> •

Identity coherence. The subscriber identifier (e.g., IMSI) is the same across SS7, Diameter, and GTP for the window.  

> •

Visited-network and location compatibility. Network identifiers and location indicators (e.g., PLMN and related location codes) are compatible across protocols.  

> •

Unique session and tunnel references. Session identi-fiers in Diameter and tunnel endpoint identifiers in GTP do not collide across subscribers or concurrent sessions.  

> •

Address allocation coherence. Packet Data Network (PDN) addresses assigned in GTP are unique across subscribers and consistent with the subscriber’s active context.  

> •

Routing plausibility. Routing addresses or numbers in SS7 (e.g., Global Titles) and host or realm information in Diameter are plausible together and with the subscriber’s context.  

> •

Protocol semantic consistency. The application context in SS7 is compatible with the invoked operation, without opcode or context mismatches.  

> •

Access-profile agreement. The access point in use (APN) matches the subscribed or provisioned profile implied by control-plane signalling. A fused record is anomalous when any expectation above fails in a way that remains plausible within each protocol but becomes contradictory in the combined (fused) view. IV. M ETHODOLOGY 

We analyze and surface candidate cross-protocol inconsis-tencies by combining per-subscriber, per-minute fusion with learned representations and per-embedding model unsuper-vised detectors. We build a fused record that aggregates SS7, Diameter, and GTP signalling messages and preserves their raw fields. We introduce protocol-plausible synthetic anoma-lies that create cross-protocol contradictions by swapping consistency-critical field groups ( one at a time ) across fused records. We pass the fused record’s JSON text to several embedding models and fit an unsupervised per-model detector on the resulting vectors. The final decision uses a consensus score equal to the number of models that flag the record as anomalous. Below, we detail on every step. 

A. Per-Subscriber, Per-Minute Fusion 

We construct a fused record for each pair (subscriber, minute) by grouping decoded SS7, Diameter, and GTP mes-sages on a canonical subscriber identifier and a UTC minute timestamp. Messages are sorted by their event time and appended to protocol-specific arrays (ss7, diameter, gtp) while preserving their raw JSON fields. We retain for downstream analysis only those fused windows that contain messages from at least two protocol families so that cross-protocol checks are possible. Within each window, we keep all messages in time order and preserve their native raw fields in protocol-specific arrays ( ss7[ ] , diameter[ ] , gtp[ ] ). The fusion step is deterministic and does not alter message contents. 

B. Synthetic Anomaly Construction 

We create protocol-plausible inconsistencies through single field-group swaps applied to pairs of fused records. A field group is a coherent set of paths that refer to the same concept across messages. For each mutation, we leverage two given source records and exchange all paths in the chosen group so that each swap preserves per-protocol validity yet induces a contradiction in the joint view. For both mutated outputs we attach minimal metadata, indicating the mutation family and field group. Each synthetic record includes exactly one swap group. Pairs where paths are absent or values are identical are skipped, and all other fields remain untouched. We implement the thirteen field groups listed below. Methodologically related studies have used mutation-based transformations and con-trolled perturbations to examine model behaviour, evaluation sensitivity, and vulnerability-relevant artefacts [27]. In the present setting, a similar evaluation logic is applied to fused signalling records, where the goal is not to mimic a single known attack trace but to introduce industrial partner-approved protocol-plausible contradictions in the joint cross-protocol view. 

1) SS7: Calling-Party Global Title (CGGT): In Signalling System No. 7 (SS7) with the Mobile Application Part (MAP), the Calling-Party Global Title (CGGT) identifies the appar-ent originating node or interconnect (e.g., the serving Mo-bile Switching Centre/Visitor Location Register, MSC/VLR) and is carried in the Signalling Connection Control Part (SCCP) addressing fields [28]. MAP procedures that con-vey subscriber mobility context (e.g., UpdateLocation ,

SendRoutingInfo ) are specified in 3GPP TS 29.002 [29]. Our mutation swaps the full CGGT group between two fused records (GT’s value together with derived operator or location attributes such as country and PLMN identifiers MCC/MNC), which keeps the SS7 fragment syntactically valid and routable [30]. In the fused, minute-level view for the same subscriber, the apparent SS7 origin can then contradict contemporary indi-cators in other protocols, such as the Origin-Host attribute in the Diameter base protocol (RFC 6733) or the visited-network and location indicators carried in Diameter S6a and GTP control plane (3GPP TS 29.272 and TS 29.274) [31]. This produces the cross-protocol inconsistency we intend to surface while leaving each protocol’s message individually valid [32]. 

2) SS7: Called-Party Global Title (CDGT): In SS7 with the Signalling Connection Control Part (SCCP), the Called-Party Global Title (CDGT) is the destination addressing element used for global title translation and routing to the target application entity (e.g., a Home Location Register, HLR) [28]. In Mobile Application Part (MAP) procedures, the called-party address commonly carries numbering formats such as E.214 that are derived from subscriber identifiers and used to reach databases like the HLR or serving switches [30]. Our mutation swaps the entire CDGT group between two fused records while leaving message structure and MAP operation semantics intact, so the SS7 segment remains syntactically valid and routable on its own [29]. In the fused, minute-level view for the same subscriber, the altered destination can conflict with contemporary context in other protocols (e.g., the Diameter 

Origin-Host /visited-PLMN or GTP control-plane state), creating an apparent misrouting of signalling traffic [33]. Such cross-protocol inconsistencies are consistent with known risks in interconnect signalling, where manipulated global titles can enable redirection, interception, or charging anomalies if downstream routing follows the modified address. 

3) SS7: Point Codes (OPC/DPC): In SS7, the Originating Point Code (OPC) and Destination Point Code (DPC) identify the source and destination signalling points and are carried in the Message Transfer Part level 3 (MTP3) routing label [34]. In mobile core signalling, Mobile Application Part (MAP) transactions traverse network functions such as the Mobile Switching Centre/Visitor Location Register (MSC/VLR) and the Home Location Register (HLR), so the OPC/DPC pair implies which network nodes a transaction appears to use along its path [35]. Our mutation swaps the OPC and DPC (including operation-level fields when present) between two fused records while leaving other fields intact, which keeps the SS7 message syntactically valid and routable [34]. In the fused, minute-level view for the same subscriber, the altered OPC/DPC can contradict contemporary context carried in Diameter or GTP, exemplifying as an apparent change in the signalling path through different MSC/VLR domains [33]. Such cross-protocol inconsistencies align with documented interconnect risks where manipulated routing information can lead to misdirection or exposure of signalling traffic. 

4) SS7: Application Context: In SS7 with the Mobile Ap-plication Part (MAP), the Application Context Name (ACN) identifies the negotiated set of MAP operations and version for a Transaction Capabilities Application Part (TCAP) dia-logue [29]. The ACN is carried in the TCAP dialogue portion and constraints that MAP operations are semantically valid. An invoked operation that does not match the negotiated ACN constitutes a protocol-level inconsistency even if lower-layer encoding remains well formed [36]. Our mutation swaps the ACN between two fused records while leaving other fields unchanged, which preserves SS7 decodability but alters the in-tended operation family and version associated with the MAP transaction [29]. In the fused, minute-level view for the same subscriber, the altered ACN can conflict with contemporary context in other protocols (e.g., procedure stage or visited-network information inferred from Diameter or GTP), induc-ing a cross-protocol inconsistency [33]. Such inconsistencies align with documented interconnect risks, where manipulated MAP application contexts can contribute to misrouting when combined with other control-plane signals. 

5) Diameter: User Identifier (User-Name): In the Di-ameter control plane, the User-Name Attribute-Value Pair (AVP) serves as the user identity container and is defined by the Diameter base protocol [31]. On the Subscription-Data-Application (S6a) interface used between the Mobility Management Entity (MME) and the Home Subscriber Server (HSS), 3GPP specifies that User-Name carries the Interna-tional Mobile Subscriber Identity (IMSI) for the subscriber [32]. Our mutation swaps the entire User-Name AVP between two fused records, which preserves message structure and remains valid under the Diameter AVP rules. In the fused, minute-level view for the same subscriber, the altered Diam-eter identity can then disagree with the IMSI conveyed or implied by other protocols, such as the IMSI and location context present in GPRS Tunnelling Protocol control sig-nalling (GTPv2-C) and MAP procedures [37]. This identity mismatch across protocols is a cross-protocol inconsistency of operational concern, as highlighted in signalling-security guidance for interconnect environments [33]. 

6) Diameter: Session-Id: In the Diameter control plane, the Session-Id Attribute-Value Pair (AVP) is the end-to-end identifier that uniquely labels a Diameter session and must remain constant across all related requests and answers [31]. On the Subscription-Data-Application (S6a) interface between the Mobility Management Entity (MME) and the Home Sub-scriber Server (HSS), procedures require the request and the corresponding answer to carry the same Session-Id so that transactions are correlated reliably [32]. Our mutation swaps the Session-Id between two fused records while leaving the Diameter message structure intact, which preserves AVP valid-ity but alters the session linkage implied by the control plane. In the fused, minute-level view for the same subscriber, this change can make two different subscribers appear to share one Diameter session or can split one subscriber’s activity across mismatched sessions, which conflicts with GPRS Tunnelling Protocol control-plane (GTPv2-C) bearer and tunnel state [37]. Such cross-protocol inconsistencies align with known inter-connect risks, where manipulated identifiers in one protocol can mislead downstream processing or misrouting and abuse. 

7) Diameter: Origin-Host: In the Diameter control plane, the Origin-Host Attribute-Value Pair (AVP) identifies the sending Diameter node and is used together with Origin-Realm for peer identification and routing. On the S6a interface between the Mobility Management Entity (MME) and the Home Subscriber Server (HSS), messages carry Origin-Host 

to denote the specific MME instance and its administrative domain, which anchors subsequent transactions for the same subscriber [32]. Our mutation swaps the Origin-Host value in the request across two fused records while leaving other AVPs intact, which preserves AVP syntax and Diameter message validity but alters the apparent source node and realm [31]. In the fused, minute-level view for the same subscriber, the al-tered Diameter origin can contradict contemporary SS7 routing indicators (e.g., Calling-Party Global Title or point codes) and GPRS Tunnelling Protocol (GTP) control-plane context such as visited-network or location information, thereby creating a cross-protocol inconsistency. This kind of origin imperson-ation is consistent with signalling-security concerns reported for interconnect environments, where manipulation of peer-identifying attributes can enable misleading transaction prove-nance and misrouting [33]. 

8) Diameter: Visited-PLMN-Id: On the Subscription-Data-Application (S6a) interface, the Visited-PLMN-Id Attribute-Value Pair (AVP) conveys the identifier of the currently visited Public Land Mobile Network as an MCC/MNC pair. The encoding and interpretation of PLMN identifiers (MCC/MNC) are specified in the Non-Access Stratum (NAS) procedures for Evolved Packet System mobility management [38]. Our mutation swaps the MCC/MNC carried in Visited-PLMN-Id 

between two fused records, which preserves Diameter message syntax while changing the asserted visited network for the same subscriber and minute. In the fused view, this altered Diameter visited-PLMN can conflict with contemporaneous SS7 or GTP indicators (e.g., routing addresses, user-location information, or APN context), producing a false roaming or location-spoofing signal [39]. Roaming guidelines further emphasize that consistent PLMN identity across interfaces is required for correct inter-PLMN procedures, which motivates cross-protocol checks for such inconsistencies. 

9) Diameter: APN Service-Selection: On the S6a interface, subscriber provisioning is conveyed in the Subscription-Data 

container, which includes an APN-Configuration list. Each entry carries a Service-Selection AVP that names the allowed Access Point Name (APN) for packet-data connectivity. The APN string format and naming rules are defined by 3GPP as a DNS-like label sequence that identifies the external packet data network (PDN) to be reached [30]. In the control plane for bearer establishment, the requested APN is carried in GPRS Tunnelling Protocol for Control plane (GTPv2-C) messages such as Create Session Request , and the network selects or verifies the APN accordingly [37]. Our mutation swaps the Service-Selection entries in the APN-Configuration 

list between two fused records while keeping Diameter syn-tax valid, which can cause the provisioned APN profile in Diameter to diverge from the APN signalled in concurrent GTP procedures for the same subscriber and minute [32]. Such divergence is operationally relevant because alignment of the provisioned APN set with the APN used on the bearer is assumed by roaming and interworking guidelines and by EPC architectural specifications [33]. 10) GTP: TEIDs: In the GPRS Tunnelling Protocol (GTP), the Tunnel Endpoint Identifier (TEID) labels a specific tunnel and binds user traffic or control transactions to that tunnel context. On the control plane (GTPv2-C), Fully Qualified TEID (F-TEID) information elements carry the TEID together with the associated IP address to identify endpoints of EPS bearer procedures [37]. On the user plane (GTP-U), the TEID appears in every GTP-U header and demultiplexes user packets to the correct EPS bearer at the receiving gateway [40]. Our mutation swaps TEID values between two fused records (for control and, when present, user plane) while leaving message structure intact, which preserves protocol syntax but changes the tunnel binding implied by the control and user planes [41]. In the fused, minute-level view for the same subscriber, such swaps can make two different user equipments (UEs) appear to share one bearer or can split one UE’s traffic across mismatched tunnels, contradicting the session and bearer relationships defined for the Evolved Packet System (EPS) and exposed concurrently in Diameter. 

11) GTP: APN: In the GPRS Tunnelling Protocol control plane (GTPv2-C), the Access Point Name (APN) is carried as an information element in procedures such as Create Session Request to indicate the external packet data net-work to be reached. APN naming and resolution follow 3GPP DNS procedures that derive a fully qualified domain name and select appropriate gateways for the requested PDN [37]. Our mutation swaps the APN value in the relevant GTP control messages between two fused records while leaving message structure and syntax valid for GTPv2-C. In the fused, minute-level view for the same subscriber, the altered APN in GTP can conflict with the subscribed APN profile conveyed in Diameter S6a within the Subscription-Data container (APN-Configuration and Service-Selection), creating a cross-protocol inconsistency [32]. Such divergence is operationally relevant because policy and charging control assume alignment be-tween the subscriber’s provisioned APN set and the APN used on the bearer during establishment and enforcement. 

12) GTP: User Location Information: In the GPRS Tun-nelling Protocol control plane (GTPv2-C), the User Location Information (ULI) information element carries the serving network and cell context, including Mobile Country Code/-Mobile Network Code (MCC/MNC) and area or cell iden-tifiers such as Location Area Code (LAC), Tracking Area Code (TAC), Routing Area Code (RAC), and Cell Identity (CI) [37]. The formats and semantics of these identifiers (PLMN codes, LAC/TAC, and GERAN/UTRAN/E-UTRAN cell identities) are defined in the 3GPP numbering and iden-tification specification [30]. Our mutation swaps the MCC, MNC, and the relevant area and cell identifiers within the ULI between two fused records while leaving GTP message structure and syntax valid. In the fused, minute-level view, the altered ULI can contradict the visited-network identity conveyed concurrently on the Diameter S6a interface (e.g., the Visited-PLMN-Id AVP), producing a location or roaming inconsistency [32]. The altered ULI can also disagree with recent mobility updates recorded in SS7/MAP procedures such as UpdateLocation , which further exposes cross-protocol contradictions for the same subscriber and time window [29]. 

13) GTP: PDN IP Address: In the GPRS Tunnelling Pro-tocol control plane (GTPv2-C), the PDN Address Allocation (PAA) information element carries the IP address (IPv4 and/or IPv6) assigned to the user equipment and is included by the Packet Data Network Gateway (P-GW) in procedures such as Create Session Response [37]. The allocation and binding of this PDN address to the subscriber’s EPS bearer context are specified in the Evolved Packet System mobility ar-chitecture, which requires consistent association of the address with the corresponding PDN connection and user identity [41]. Our mutation swaps the assigned PDN IPv4 address between two fused records while leaving GTPv2-C message structure valid, so the control-plane signalling remains syntactically correct although the address-to-subscriber binding is altered. In the fused, minute-level view, this change can make the same IP address appear on multiple subscribers or can decouple a subscriber’s Diameter and GTP contexts, which is inconsistent with the EPS requirement that a PDN address be uniquely and correctly associated with a single active PDN connection [29]. 

C. Text Serialization 

We use the fused JSON text itself as input for the embedding models. Each record is a deterministic JSON line containing the protocol arrays and their raw fields. Instead of truncating fused records for length, for each model, we include only those records whose tokenization length fits its context window. This selection is performed during dataset preparation. Next, we normalize each fused record by removing newline characters and collapsing consecutive whitespace into single ones. Each record becomes a single-line, space-separated string of tokens [13], [42]. Then, we obtain vector representa-tions of the normalized text, using multiple embedding models. Embeddings are obtained only for those records fitting the context window of a given model, as selected during dataset preparation. The resulting embeddings are cached for reuse. 

D. Per-Model Detection and Consensus 

For each embedding model, we employ an unsupervised detector that operates on that model’s embedding vectors and produces a binary decision (i.e., anomalous or not) for each record. Given a fused record, the embedding model first encodes its serialized representation into a fixed-dimensional vector. The detector then assigns the label based solely on this embedding vector. When a given record exceeds an embedding model’s context window, its embedding vector is not obtained, and the unsupervised detector makes no decision for the record. For each fused record, we aggregate the available per-model decisions into a consensus count, defined as the number of embedding models whose detector flags the record as anomalous. This consensus count serves as a ranking score summarizing the level of agreement across models, with higher consensus count indicating stronger agreement. We retain the per-model binary decisions alongside the consensus count for downstream analysis. {"imsi": "001010123456789", "timestamp": "2025-10-28T07:40:37Z", "application_context": "4.0.0.1.0.14.3", "cggt": "001234567890", "cggt_country": "zz", "cggt_mccmnc": "00101", "cggt_tadig": "TSTZZ", "cdgt": "001987654321", "cdgt_country": "zz", "cdgt_mccmnc": "00101", "cdgt_tadig": "TSTZZ", "operations": [{"application_context": "4.0.0.1.0.14.3", "opc": 1200, "dpc": 1300, "cggt": "001234567890", "cdgt": "001987654321" }]}

(a) SS7 fragment (anonymized sample)                 

> {"imsi": "001010123456789", "timestamp": "2025-10-28T07:40:12Z", "avps": {"User-Name": "001010123456789", "Session-Id": "mme01.epc.mnc001.mcc001.3gppnetwork.org;12345;67890", "Origin-Host": "mme01.epc.mnc001.mcc001.3gppnetwork.org", "Visited-PLMN-Id": {"mcc": "001", "mnc": "01", "mccmnc": "00101" }, "Subscription-Data": {"APN-Configuration": [{"Service-Selection": "internet" }]}}}

(b) Diameter fragment (anonymized sample)                      

> {"imsi": "001010123456789", "timestamp": "2025-10-28T07:40:55Z", "operations": [{"teid": 0, "teid_cp": 314159265, "apn": "internet", "user_location_information": {"mcc": "001", "mnc": "01", "mccmnc": "00101", "lac": 1001, "ci": 2002 }, "end_user_addr": {"ipv4": "198.51.100.23" } }]}

(c) GTP fragment (anonymized sample)                                                                

> {"minute_ts": "2025-10-28T07:40:00Z", "imsi": "001010123456789", "ss7": [{"application_context": "4.0.0.1.0.14.3", "cggt": "001234567890", "cggt_mccmnc": "00101", "cdgt": "001987654321", "cdgt_mccmnc": "00101", "operations": [{"opc": 1200, "dpc": 1300 } ] } ], "diameter": [{"req": {"avps": {"User-Name": "001010123456789", "Session-Id": "mme01.epc.mnc001.mcc001.3gppnetwork.org;12345;67890", "Origin-Host": "mme01.epc.mnc001.mcc001.3gppnetwork.org", "Visited-PLMN-Id": {"mcc": "001", "mnc": "01", "mccmnc": "00101" }, "Subscription-Data": {"APN-Configuration": [{"Service-Selection": "internet" }] } }}}], "gtp": [{"operations": [{"teid_cp": 314159265, "apn": "internet", "user_location_information": {"mcc": "001", "mnc": "01", "mccmnc": "00101", "lac": 1001, "ci": 2002 }, "end_user_addr": {"ipv4": "198.51.100.23" } }]}]}

(d) Fused record 

Fig. 1: Anonymized signalling samples. On the left, we show individual fragments of SS7 and Diameter protocols. On the right, we show the individual fragment from GTP protocol, and the fused record that aggregates all 3 for one subscriber-minute. V. E XPERIMENTS SETUP 

A. Datasets 

We evaluate on a large corpus of fused records constructed as in Section IV, where each record aggregates all SS7, Diameter, and GTP messages for one subscriber within a one-minute window. Only windows containing at least two protocol families are retained. Two disjoint sets are used. The first is an unlabeled background consisting of all retained fused records. The second is a synthetic set generated by single field-group swaps that preserve per-protocol validity while inducing cross-protocol inconsistencies. Both sets are converted to text by flattening the fused JSON into dotted key-value sequences and are embedded model-by-model, selecting only the records that fit each model’s context window without truncation. Figure 1 

shows anonymized samples of the SS7, Diameter, and GTP fragments and the corresponding fused record. 

Table I illustrates the original records in our dataset. On average, the tokenized length of the flattened fused record is 

7,741 tokens. Synthetic anomalies are generated uniformly, i.e., for each retained fused record used as a seed, we apply every field-group mutation (swap) resulting in two mutated records (i.e, one per partner in the swap), yielding a total of 

211 ,172 synthetic records across all families. This total can be expressed as 8,122 seed records with at least two protocols, 

13 mutation families, and 2 resultant records per mutation, as we show below. Total synthetic records | {z }

211 , 172 =

Fused records with ≥ 2

protocols 

| {z }

8, 122 

×

Mutation families (Section IV-B) 

| {z }

13 

×

Resultant records per mutation | {z }

2TABLE I: Original records         

> Total SS7 fragments 59292 Total Diameter fragments 9520 Total GTP fragments 159003 Total fused candidates (all windows) 78982
> Fused records considered (with ≥2 protocols) 8122
> Fused records with exactly 2 protocols 4680 Fused records with all 3 protocols 3442

B. Embedding Models and Detector 

We use the six embedding models listed below from a local Ollama runtime. All models receive the same flattened JSON text and embed only those serialized records whose tokenization length fits the given context window, without truncating any inputs. The resulting embeddings are cached and reused across runs. 1) bge-m3:567m . This is a multilingual model (covering more than one hundred languages) derived from the 

XLM-RoBERTa family. It supports dense, multi-vector, and sparse retrieval within a single model, a design de-scribed as “Multi-Functionality, Multi-Linguality, Multi-Granularity” [43]. 2) jina-embeddings-v2-base-en . This English, monolin-gual model provides an 8,192-token context window and uses a JinaBERT/BERT backbone with ALiBi for long sequences. Its training technique combines C4 pretraining with hundreds of millions of sentence pairs and hard negatives for semantic retrieval [44]. 3) nomic-embed-text:v1.5 . This model is a large-context text encoder intended for embedding-only use. The model card reports competitive performance relative to widely used baselines on both short- and long-context tasks [45]. 4) snowflake-arctic-embed2:568m . This is Snowflake’s Arctic Embed 2.0, a multilingual model designed to extend language coverage while maintaining English performance and deployment scalability, as described in the model documentation [46]. 5) snowflake-arctic-embed:137m . This member of the Arctic embedding family provides a smaller, faster foot-print suited to high-throughput use. The accompanying metadata describes a nomic-bert style architecture for the 137M-parameter variant [47]. 6) jina-embeddings-v2-base-code:q8 . This multilingual, code-centric model supports English and numerous pro-gramming languages with an 8,192-token context win-dow. It uses a JinaBERT backbone with ALiBi to handle long inputs [48]. For each model, we embed only the records that fit its context window (i.e., no truncation), cache the vectors, and use a single unsupervised detector (Isolation Forest with feature standardization) on embeddings from the unlabeled background. The detector leverages both, the background and the synthetic anomalies. A record receives a binary decision from any model that processes it, and the consensus count is the number of models that label it anomalous. We aggregate the per-model binary outputs into a consensus count for each record, namely S, defined as the number of models, out of the total (six), that deem the record anomalous. The models that do not process a record contribute no vote. 

C. Evaluation 

To validate our results without human labels, we treat the unlabeled fused records as background and generate synthetic anomalies by swapping one field group at a time (mutation), as described in Section IV. For each model, we form an unlabeled training pool that contains background embeddings and a small proportion of synthetic embeddings ( 5% of background embeddings). Including a small proportion of synthetic embed-dings in the pool lets the detector learn a density landscape where the synthetic rows are rare, while the method remains label-free as the training does not use any labels. We fit an unsupervised Isolation Forest on this pool with a fixed contamination rate of 0.01 . To avoid circular evaluation, we hold out a disjoint subset of synthetic records for testing, and we report all agreement and precision results on this held-out subset. We split the synthetic set within each mutation family so that both the training pool and the evaluation set contain examples of every family. Next, we estimate precision at thresholds S ≥ k using the held-out synthetic set as the positive control and the unlabeled original fused corpus as background. We apply the statistical tests to quantify the association between consensus and the held-out synthetic anomalies. Finally, we quantify how much the anomaly decisions change between a synthetic fused record and its original counterpart. For a subset of synthetic records linked to their original fused records, we compute the cosine distance between them. This provides a similarity score illustrating how differently the ensemble behaves on the two records. In the remainder of this section, we describe these evaluation steps in more detail. 

1) Consensus: For each model we obtain a single binary decision per record from the detector described above, where 

1 indicates that the model marks the record as anomalous and 

0 means that the record is considered as benign. For a given fused record r, let S(r) be the number of models that flag r. We also keep the coverage count N (r), which is the number of models that produced a decision for r. By construction 0 ≤ S(r) ≤ N (r) ≤ 6. In later analyses we consider operating points defined by thresholds S ≥ k. When a threshold is applied, only records with N (r) ≥ 1 are eligible, and a record satisfies the threshold if at least k models deem it anomalous. We report S for ranking and filtering, and we retain N to document model coverage for every record. 

2) Precision Estimation at Consensus Thresholds: We esti-mate precision as a function of the consensus threshold using the held-out synthetic set as the positive control. Let U be the unlabeled fused records and let S be the held-out synthetic records. For any threshold k, we consider the set 

Ak = { r ∈ U ∪ S : N (r) ≥ 1 and S(r) ≥ k }.TABLE II: Agreement histogram across consensus levels among records flagged by at least one embedding model (S ≥ 1) 

Consensus Flagged records 

S Count Percentage 1 41,408 18.88% 2 25,280 11.53% 3 13,135 5.99% 4 8,528 3.89% 5 6,348 2.89% 6 2,120 0.97% Total flagged 96,819 44.148% 

TABLE III: Consensus counts by set, including unflagged (predicted benign, 

S=0 ) records                             

> Consensus S(in flagging a fused record as anomalous) Set 0123456Synthetic (Mutated fused records) 114,377 41,403 25,277 13,134 8,525 6,348 2,120 Background (Original fused records) 8,110 531300Total 122,487 41,408 25,280 13,135 8,528 6,348 2,120

The precision at threshold k is 

Prec( k) = |A k ∩ S| |A k| .

This metric is employed to define, among the records that reach the threshold S ≥ k, the fraction that are synthetically crafted. Records with no model decision are excluded because they cannot reach any consensus level. We compute Prec( k) for k = 1, . . . , 6 and, for each threshold, summarize how many records satisfy S ≥ k, how many of these belong to the original set, and what fraction of the full corpus this predicted-anomalous set represents. This enables us to examine how the synthetic share among flagged records (and thus precision on synthetic anomalies under our construction) varies with the consensus threshold. All computations use only the held-out synthetic set together with the original (unlabeled) set. 

3) Statistical Association: We quantify the relationship between consensus and the held-out synthetic anomalies with tests that do not rely on distributional assumptions. Throughout this section, held-out synthetic anomalies refer to the subset of mutated fused records (field-swap) reserved for evaluation and excluded from detector fitting. We employ the Threshold association for this evaluation, where for a chosen threshold 

k we form a 2 × 2 table over eligible records with N (r) ≥ 1,as shown here: Synthetic Original 

S(r) ≥ k a bS(r) < k c d

We test the association between the row and the column with Fisher ’s exact test when any cell count is small and with the chi-square test otherwise. We report the p-value and an effect size. The effect size is the odds ratio OR = a d b c 

with a confidence interval. We repeat this procedure for 

k = 1 , . . . , 6. When we examine many thresholds or many mutation families we control the false discovery rate with the 

Benjamini-Hochberg procedure. 

4) Cosine Similarity: For a subset of synthetic fused records, we additionally quantify how much the anomaly decisions differ from those on their original counterparts. For every synthetic–original pair, we form two six-dimensional vectors that contain the binary anomaly decisions of the six models, one vector for the original record and one for the synthetic record. We then compute the cosine similarity between these two decision vectors, 

cos( u, v ) = u⊤v

∥u∥ ∥ v∥ ,

and use the corresponding cosine distance 1 − cos( u, v ) as a measure of disagreement between the ensemble decisions on the pair. Smaller distances indicate that the ensemble behaves similarly on the original and synthetic records, while larger distances indicate greater changes in the anomaly pattern across models. VI. R ESULTS 

A. Agreement Statistics by Consensus Level 

To illustrate how often the models agree with each other, 

Table II reports the distribution of consensus among all records that are flagged by at least one model (S ≥ 1) .For context, Table III shows the counts within the held-out synthetic set and the unlabeled background, including S = 0 .Across the two sets, 96,819 records are flagged by at least one model. Single-model alerts are most common, and the mass decreases as the consensus requirement increases. The background (considered benign), contributes very few flagged records, while the synthetic set (mutated fused signalling records), spans the full range of consensus values. Next, we illustrate the distribution of exact consensus levels S among flagged records. In the following sub-section, we consider cumulative thresholds S ≥ k and report, for each k, the number of kept records, the original records passing the threshold, and the fraction of synthetic records among the flagged set, compared to their overall share in the evaluation corpus. 

B. Distribution of Predicted Anomalies at Consensus Thresh-olds and Trade-offs 

For a threshold k, we treat records with S ≥ k as predicted anomalous. In Table IV , we report the number TABLE IV: Counts and rates at consensus thresh-olds. Values are cumulative for S ≥ k.                        

> k
> Total Records (predicted anomalous) Background (Original) predicted anomalous Background share (predicted anomalous) Corpus fraction (predicted anomalous) 196,819 12 0.012% 0.441 255,411 70.013% 0.253 330,131 40.013% 0.137 416,996 30.017% 0.077 58,468 00.000% 0.039 62,120 00.000% 0.009

TABLE V: Distribution of records predicted as anomalous by each embedding model                         

> Embedding Model Synthetic records processed (Coverage) Background (Original) processed (Coverage) Synthetic records predicted anomalous Background (Original) predicted anomalous nomic-embed-text:v1.5 25.9% 12.3% 32,943 0snowflake-arctic-embed:137m 25.8% 12.3% 32,810 0jina-embeddings-v2-base-en 100.0% 100.0% 36,220 6bge-m3:567m 100.0% 100.0% 36,012 6snowflake-arctic-embed2:568m 100.0% 100.0% 35,994 6jina-embeddings-v2-base-code:q8 100.0% 100.0% 35,940 8

of predicted anomalous records, how many come from the unlabeled background, the background share within this set, and the fraction of the corpus predicted anomalous. The corpus size is T = 219 , 294 .Background leakage remains extremely small across thresh-olds (12 records at S ≥ 1, 7 at S ≥ 2, 4 at S ≥ 3, and 3 at 

S ≥ 4, and 0 at S ≥ 5). The fraction of the corpus predicted anomalous falls from 44 .1% at S ≥ 1 to 0.9% at S ≥ 6.Regarding the trade-off between coverage and volume, at 

S ≥ 3, about 13 .7% of the corpus (30,131 records) is predicted anomalous and only four of these records come from the background. At S ≥ 4, the predicted anomalies drop to 7.7% 

(16,996 records) with three background records. At S ≥ 5, the predicted anomalies drop further to 3.9% of the corpus (8,468 records), with no background record predicted as anomalous. Thresholds in this range offer a trade-off as higher thresholds reduce the number of records that require inspection while keeping the number of background records minimal. 

C. Per-Model Coverage and Intersections 

Not all the fused records in our dataset can be processed by all six embedding models. Some embedding models have shorter context windows and therefore have to skip longer fused records, while others process the full dataset. Table V 

illustrates the extent to which the synthetic and the fused orig-inal records are processed by each model and the distribution of records predicted as anomalous in each set. Two models, nomic-embed-text:v1.5 and snowflake-arctic-embed:137m , process only about a quarter of the synthetic control (roughly 26%) and about one eighth of the background (about 12%), which is consistent with their smaller effective context windows. The other four embedding models process all records in both sets, so they contribute towards a decision in every case. For each model, the number of synthetic records it predicts as anomalous ranges from 32000 to 36000 approxi-mately, while only a handful of background (original) records are predicted as anomalous per model (between 0 and 8). The missing-decision statistics show that consensus is often computed over fewer than six models. For the two models with smaller context windows, the background-missing and synthetic-missing rates are about 0.88 and 0.74 , respectively, while the other four models have negligible missing rates. On average, the proportion of missing models per row is 0.29 for the background and 0.25 for the synthetic set, and the median missing rate per row is 0.33 in both sets. With six models, this median corresponds to two models not producing a decision for a typical record. As a result, many records receive decisions from four models, and the maximum achievable consensus level on such records is bounded by the number of models that were able to process them. 

D. Consensus across Mutation Families (Synthetic records) 

The synthetic set contains 211,172 mutated fused records as a result of the application of thirteen mutation families, one for each swapped field group. Every eligible fused record contributes two synthetic records per field group, so all muta-tion families have the same number of samples. This balanced construction avoids class imbalance between mutation types when we compare synthetic records with the background. We evaluate the association between consensus and the mutations by comparing the synthetic set with the background set at thresholds S ≥ k, using the contingency-table procedure described in Section V-C2. Table VI reports the resulting odds ratios and p-values. Across all thresholds, records with 

S ≥ k are hundreds of times more likely to be synthetic than background, and all adjusted Fisher p-values are below 10 −35 .At low and moderate thresholds ( k = 1 to 4), the odds ratios range from about 236 to 572, which means that records with S ≥ k are hundreds of times more likely to belong to the synthetic set than to the background set. At higher thresholds ( k = 5 and 6), no fused original record satisfies 

S ≥ k. In the odds ratio formula, as the background set count (predicted as anomalous) for S ≥ k appears in the denominator and since no fused original record is predicted anomalous at higher thresholds ( k = 5 and 6), the estimate encounters division by zero and is therefore infinite ( ∞). This corresponds to perfect separation between the synthetic and background (original) sets at these thresholds. Regarding the 

Fisher exact tests (pFisher ) and chi-square tests (pχ2 ), they yield extremely small p-values as mentioned in Table VI. After correction for multiple testing, all adjusted Fisher p-values remain below 10 −35 . Even though we do not assume that these mutations correspond to real incidents, these results show that high consensus scores are very strongly associated with the mutations that we introduce. TABLE VI: Association between consensus threshold S ≥ k and membership in the synthetic set. Very small p-values that underflow to zero in software are reported as < 10 −300 .                                                          

> kOdds ratio pFisher pχ2pFisher,adj
> 1572.02 <10 −300 <10 −300 <10 −300
> 2412.31 <10 −300 <10 −300 <10 −300
> 3337.70 <10 −300 5.17 ×10 −292 <10 −300
> 4236.82 8.55 ×10 −283 1.20 ×10 −154 1.28 ×10 −282
> 5∞(div. by 0) 3.87 ×10 −142 1.19 ×10 −75 4.64 ×10 −142
> 6∞(div. by 0) 2.32 ×10 −35 1.15 ×10 −19 2.32 ×10 −35

TABLE VII: Cosine distance between syn-thetic records and the background (fused original), grouped at consensus level S.

S Mean distance Median distance 1 0.274 0.240 2 0.150 0.138 3 0.158 0.134 4 0.143 0.113 5 0.114 0.114 6 0.114 0.114 

E. Cosine Distance between Synthetic Records and Back-ground (Fused Original) Records 

For a subset of synthetic fused records, we link each record to its original record. For every such pair, we form two six-dimensional vectors that contain the binary anomaly decisions of the six models, one vector for the original record and one for the synthetic record. Then, we compute the cosine distance between these two decision vectors. This distance is derived from the cosine similarity of the vectors, so smaller values indicate higher similarity in direction, while larger values indicate lower similarity. 

Table VII reports the mean and median cosine distances for the linked pairs, grouped by the consensus level S of the synthetic record. The table illustrates our similarity analysis of synthetic records with S ≥ 1. As observed, the average cosine distance is largest at S = 1 , with a mean value of about 0.27 .For higher consensus levels S ≥ 2, the mean distances fall into a narrower range between approximately 0.11 and 0.16 .In parallel, medians show a similar pattern. 

F. Sensitivity Analyses 

Our evaluation uses synthetic records generated by field swaps and an unlabeled set of original fused records. In this setting it is important to check whether the main observations depend strongly on the exact consensus threshold S ≥ k or whether they remain stable when k varies. 

Table IV summarizes, for each consensus threshold k, how many records with S ≥ k are predicted anomalous, how many of these flagged records come from the original fused corpus (background) rather than the synthetic set, and what fraction of the full corpus this flagged set represents. When the threshold is S ≥ 1, the system flags 96 ,819 records, which is 44 .1% 

of the corpus, and 12 of these are original fused records. At 

S ≥ 3, the flagged set is reduced to 30 ,131 records, 13 .7% of the corpus, and 4 of these are original fused records. At S ≥ 4,the system flags 16 ,996 records, 7.7% of the corpus, with 3 original fused records. At S ≥ 5, the flagged set contains 8,468 

records, 3.9% of the corpus, and none of these are original fused records. These counts show that there is a range of thresholds, roughly from S ≥ 3 to S ≥ 5, where the workload is reduced by about an order of magnitude compared to S ≥ 1

while the number of original fused records in the flagged set remains very small. 

Table VI summarizes how the consensus threshold relates to membership in the synthetic set. For each k, the table reports the odds ratio from a 2 × 2 comparison of synthetic versus original fused records and S ≥ k versus S < k , together with the corresponding p-values. For thresholds k = 1 to 4

the odds ratios lie between about 236 and 572, which means that records above the threshold are hundreds of times more likely to be synthetic than original in our data. For k = 5 and 

k = 6 no original fused record satisfies S ≥ k. In these cases the value computed using the standard odds-ratio formula is 

∞ because the count of original fused records (predicted as anomalous) above the threshold is zero, and Fisher exact tests still produce extremely small p-values. Taken together, these observations indicate that the overall behavior of the system is not tied to any single choice of consensus threshold. Across a practical range of thresholds, the flagged set remains a small fraction of the corpus, the number of original fused records in that set is very low, and the association between higher consensus and the synthetic field swaps remains strong. VII. T HREATS TO VALIDITY 

This section outlines potential threats to the validity of our findings, given the lack of ground-truth incident labels and the use of synthetic anomalies. 

Construct validity. Our evaluation relies on protocol-plausible synthetic anomalies created by swapping a single field-group between pairs of fused records, targeting a subset of SS7, Diameter, and GTP fields that telecom protocol security reports identify as security-relevant. This design intro-duces cross-protocol inconsistencies while keeping individual messages valid. However, it may only partially overlap with behaviours that matter in practice. For instance, real attacks or severe misconfigurations might touch other fields, involve mul-tiple coordinated changes, or unfold over longer time scales. In addition, we serialize each fused record as a single JSON-like string, which can under-represent temporal structure, cross-session correlations, and rare protocol edge cases. Thus, the observed relationship between consensus and anomalousness (or irregularity) is specific to this perturbation scheme and representation, and should not be viewed as a direct calibration against real-world security incidents. External validity. Our dataset consists of SS7, Diameter, and GTP signalling traffic, however, traffic mixes, protocol flavours, and configuration practices can differ substantially across operators and over time. As a result, the observed rela-tionship between consensus and anomalies may not transfer directly to other networks or environments with additional protocols or interfaces (e.g., 5G service-based or user-plane telemetry), or to different threat models. Additionally, the ensemble is instantiated with six specific embedding models and one family of unsupervised detectors, whereas alterna-tive model choices, vector dimensions, distance metrics, or aggregation rules could alter both the distribution of consensus scores and their association with anomalies. This means that our conclusions remain valid for the selected configuration. 

Internal validity. We separate the training pool for the unsupervised detector from the evaluation corpus and exclude held-out synthetic records from fitting to limit optimistic bias and leakage, but the resulting anomalies may still be influenced by implementation artifacts, pre-processing choices, or correla-tions between the synthetic generation process and the detector rather than by properties that would align with real-world incidents. Statistical associations between consensus and syn-thetic anomalies are estimated from per-threshold contingency tables and significance tests. Although we control the false discovery rate, repeated testing and dependence between fused records mean that the resulting p-values should be viewed as approximate indicators rather than exact measures of evidence. VIII. C ONCLUSION 

In this paper, we conducted an unsupervised cross-protocol anomaly analysis in mobile core networks by fusing SS7, Diameter, and GTP signalling data into per-subscriber, per-minute records and analyzing them with a multi-embedding unsupervised ensemble. The fused representation keeps the original signalling messages intact while exposing inconsisten-cies that only become visible via cross-protocols approaches. Taken together, the obtained results suggest that, under the specified synthetic anomaly design, higher consensus behaves as a useful ranking value for concentrating anomalies into a smaller candidate set, while keeping the number of background records in that set very low. In more detail, a substantial fraction of fused records across the evaluation corpus are flagged as anomalous at the lowest consensus threshold, but high consensus remains comparatively rare. At S ≥ 1, the system flags 96,819 records (44.1% of the corpus), whereas at S ≥ 4 this drops to 16,996 records (7.7%), 8,468 records (3.9%) at S ≥ 5, and 2,120 records (0.9%) at S ≥ 6. Background leakage stays extremely small across thresholds with only 12 background (original fused) records flagged at S ≥ 1, 7 at S ≥ 2, 4 at S ≥ 3,3 at S ≥ 4, and none at S ≥ 5 or S ≥ 6. When we treat consensus as a ranking variable and compare records (synthetic versus background), the resulting odds ratios for k = 1 , . . . , 4

lie between roughly 236 and 572. This indicates that records above the threshold are hundreds of times more likely to be synthetic than original in this dataset. Moreover, for k = 5 

and k = 6 the odds ratios are effectively infinite because no original fused record satisfies S ≥ k, and Fisher exact tests still yield extremely small p-values. Additional analyses in the embedding space and over token and field co-occurrences provide a consistent picture. High-consensus records tend to lie further from typical fused records under distance-based measures and form clusters aligned with specific mutation families, whereas low-consensus records appear more dispersed. The distribution of key identifiers, locations, and routing attributes also shifts between groups of high consensus and low consensus. This is aligned with the intended cross-protocol conflicts introduced by the mutations (field swaps). While these observations are specific to the data and mutation scheme at hand, they indicate that agreement across diverse models can capture structured inconsistencies rather than arbitrary variations. The limitations analyzed in Section VII point at several directions for future work. A next step could be to extend the fusion and anomaly-generation pipeline to additional protocols and network functions, including 5G service-based interfaces. This would allow to explore synthetic anomalies that affect temporal patterns as well as single snapshots. A complemen-tary direction could be to incorporate longer-range tempo-ral structure over sequences of fused records, for instance, by combining per-record consensus with time-series models. Furthermore, once sparse labels or analyst judgments become available, it would be natural to calibrate and stress-test the consensus scores against real-world cases, and to investigate how robust the observed patterns are across deployments, protocol mixes, and model ensembles. REFERENCES [1] “Signalling Security in Telecom SS7/Diameter/5G | ENISA,” Sep. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/sig nalling-security-in-telecom-ss7-diameter-5g [2] Y. Guo, O. Ermis, Q. Tang, H. Trang, and A. De Oliveira, “An empirical study of deep learning-based ss7 attack detection,” Information , vol. 14, no. 9, p. 509, 2023. [3] S. Mashukov and Positive Technologies, Russia, “Diameter Security: An Auditor’s Viewpoint,” Journal of ICT Standardization , vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 53–68, 2017. [Online]. Available: http://www.riverpublishers.com/ journal read html article.php?j=JICTS/5/1/3 [4] “Protocol Misuse in Mobile Networks: Real-World Case Studies and Security Risks.” [Online]. Available: https://www.p1sec.com/blog/proto col-misuse-in-mobile-networks-case-studies-from-the-wild [5] “Enea Adaptive Signalling Firewall.” [Online]. Available: https: //www.enea.com/solutions/signalling-security/signalling-firewall/ [6] S. Lotfi, M. Modirrousta, S. Shashaani, S. Amini, and M. Shoore-hdeli, “Network Intrusion Detection with Limited Labeled Data,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.03147 , 2022. [7] H. Park, D. Shin, C. Park, J. Jang, and D. Shin, “Unsupervised Machine Learning Methods for Anomaly Detection in Network Packets,” Electronics , vol. 14, no. 14, p. 2779, Jan. 2025, publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2079-9292/14/14/2779 [8] A. Khraisat, I. Gondal, P. Vamplew, and J. Kamruzzaman, “Survey of intrusion detection systems: techniques, datasets and challenges,”         

> Cybersecurity , vol. 2, no. 1, p. 20, Jul. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1186/s42400-019-0038-7 [9] L. Diana, P. Dini, and D. Paolini, “Overview on Intrusion Detection Systems for Computers Networking Security,” Computers ,vol. 14, no. 3, p. 87, Mar. 2025, publisher: Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute. [Online]. Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2073-431X/14/3/8 7

[10] M. Ring, S. Wunderlich, D. Scheuring, D. Landes, and A. Hotho, “A survey of network-based intrusion detection data sets,” Computers & Security , vol. 86, pp. 147–167, Sep. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S016740481930118X [11] R. Bouman, Z. Bukhsh, and T. Heskes, “Unsupervised anomaly detection algorithms on real-world data: how many do we need?” J. Mach. Learn. Res. , vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 105:5199–105:5232, Jan. 2024. [12] R. Afzal and R. K. Murugesan, “Rule-based anomaly detection model with stateful correlation enhancing mobile network security.” Intelligent Automation & Soft Computing , vol. 31, no. 3, 2022. [13] A. Garg, R. Degiovanni, M. Jimenez, M. Cordy, M. Papadakis, and Y. L. Traon, “Learning from what we know: How to perform vulnerability prediction using noisy historical data,” Empir. Softw. Eng. , vol. 27, no. 7, p. 169, 2022. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10664-022-10197-4 [14] ——, “Learning to predict vulnerabilities from vulnerability-fixes: A machine translation approach,” CoRR , vol. abs/2012.11701, 2020. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2012.11701 [15] O. Ermis, C. Feltus, Q. Tang, H. Trang, A. De Oliveira, C. Nguyen, and A. Hirtzig, “A cnn-based semi-supervised learning approach for the detection of ss7 attacks,” in International Conference on Information Security Practice and Experience . Springer, 2022, pp. 345–363. [16] Z. Xu, Y. Wang, and X. Ge, “Analysis and application of ss7 core net-work threat detection,” in Third International Conference on Computer Science and Communication Technology (ICCSCT 2022) , vol. 12506. SPIE, 2022, pp. 353–360. [17] L. O. H. de Carvalho Macedo and M. E. M. Campista, “Attacks to mobile networks using ss7 vulnerabilities: a real traffic analysis,” 

Telecommunication Systems , vol. 83, no. 3, pp. 253–265, 2023. [18] S. Mavoungou, G. Kaddoum, M. Taha, and G. Matar, “Survey on threats and attacks on mobile networks,” IEEE Access , vol. 4, pp. 4543–4572, 2016. [19] F. R. Carlson, “Security penetration test framework for the diameter protocol,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1407.6508 , 2014. [20] S. Mashukov, “Diameter security: An auditor’s viewpoint,” Journal of ICT Standardization , vol. 5, no. 1, pp. 53–68, 2017. [21] Z. Tan, B. Ding, Z. Zhang, Q. Li, Y. Guo, and S. Lu, “Device-centric detection and mitigation of diameter signaling attacks against mobile core,” in 2021 IEEE Conference on Communications and Network Security (CNS) . IEEE, 2021, pp. 29–37. [22] S. Holtmanns, S. P. Rao, and I. Oliver, “User location tracking attacks for lte networks using the interworking functionality,” in 2016 IFIP Networking conference (IFIP Networking) and workshops . IEEE, 2016, pp. 315–322. [23] S. Park, S. Kim, K. Son, H. Kim, J. Park, and K. Yim, “Real threats using gtp protocol and countermeasures on a 4g mobile grid computing environment,” International Journal of Web and Grid Services , vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 3–24, 2017. [24] Y.-E. Kim, M.-G. Kim, and H. Kim, “Detecting iot botnet in 5g core network using machine learning,” Computers, Materials and Continua ,vol. 72, no. 3, pp. 4467–4488, 2022. [25] S. Park, B. Cho, D. Kim, and I. You, “Machine learning based signaling ddos detection system for 5g stand alone core network,” Applied Sciences , vol. 12, no. 23, p. 12456, 2022. [26] D. Pineda, R. Harrilal-Parchment, K. Akkaya, and A. Perez-Pons, “Sdn-based gtp-u traffic analysis for 5g networks,” in NOMS 2023-2023 IEEE/IFIP Network Operations and Management Symposium . IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–4. [27] A. Garg, R. Degiovanni, M. Papadakis, and Y. L. Traon, “On the coupling between vulnerabilities and llm-generated mutants: Astudy on vul4j dataset,” in IEEE Conference on Software Testing, Verification and Validation, ICST 2024, Toronto, ON, Canada, May 27-31, 2024 . IEEE, 2024, pp. 305–316. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICST60714.2024.00035 [28] “Q.713:Signalling connection control part formats and codes.” [Online]. Available: https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-Q.713 [29] “Specification # 29.002.” [Online]. Available: https://portal.3gpp.org/de sktopmodules/Specifications/SpecificationDetails.aspx?specificationId= 1585 [30] “TS 123 003 - V16.3.0 - Digital cellular telecommunications sys-tem (Phase 2+) (GSM); Universal Mobile Telecommunications System (UMTS); LTE; 5G; Numbering, addressing and identification (3GPP TS 23.003 version 16.3.0 Release 16).” [31] V. Fajardo, J. Arkko, J. A. Loughney, and G. Zorn, “Diameter Base Protocol,” Internet Engineering Task Force, Request for Comments RFC 6733, Oct. 2012, num Pages: 152. [Online]. Available: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/rfc6733 [32] “ETSI TS 129 272 V17.2.0 (2022-05) Universal Mobile Telecommunications.” [Online]. Available: https://www.intertekinfo rm.com/en-gb/standards/ [33] “Signalling Security in Telecom SS7/Diameter/5G | ENISA,” Sep. 2025. [Online]. Available: https://www.enisa.europa.eu/publications/sig nalling-security-in-telecom-ss7-diameter-5g [34] “Q.704:Signalling network functions and messages.” [Online]. Available: https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-Q.704 [35] “Specification # 23.002.” [Online]. Available: https://portal.3gpp.org/de sktopmodules/Specifications/SpecificationDetails.aspx?specificationId= 728 [36] “Q.773:Transaction capabilities formats and encoding.” [Online]. Available: https://www.itu.int/rec/T-REC-Q.773 [37] “ETSI TS 129 274.” [Online]. Available: https://store.accuristech.com/ standards/etsi-ts-129-274?product id=2208669&srsltid=AfmBOopGku 6zMszUYfVoYp4YwMP2Vak x8L6ZPzYwOFCfam5yXXaeAt4 [38] “IR.88 EPS Roaming Guidelines Version 29.0,” Dec. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.gsma.com/newsroom/gsma resources/ir-88-eps -roaming-guidelines-version-27-1/ [39] “Communications Security, Reliability, and Interoperability Council VI | Federal Communications Commission.” [Online]. Available: https://www.fcc.gov/about-fcc/advisory-committees/communications-s ecurity-reliability-and-interoperability-council [40] “ETSI TS 129 281 V17.4.0 (2022-10) Universal Mobile Telecommunications.” [Online]. Available: https://www.intertekinfo rm.com/en-ca/standards/ [41] “TS 123 401 - V17.11.0 - LTE; General Packet Radio Service (GPRS) enhancements for Evolved Universal Terrestrial Radio Access Network (E-UTRAN) access (3GPP TS 23.401 version 17.11.0 Release 17).” [42] A. Garg, R. Degiovanni, F. Molina, M. Cordy, N. Aguirre, M. Papadakis, and Y. L. Traon, “Enabling efficient assertion inference,” in 34th IEEE International Symposium on Software Reliability Engineering, ISSRE 2023, Florence, Italy, October 9-12, 2023 . IEEE, 2023, pp. 623–634. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ISSRE59848.2023.00039 [43] J. Chen, S. Xiao, P. Zhang, K. Luo, D. Lian, and Z. Liu, “Bge m3-embedding: Multi-lingual, multi-functionality, multi-granularity text embeddings through self-knowledge distillation,” 2024. [44] M. G¨ unther, J. Ong, I. Mohr, A. Abdessalem, T. Abel, M. K. Akram, S. Guzman, G. Mastrapas, S. Sturua, B. Wang, M. Werk, N. Wang, and H. Xiao, “Jina Embeddings 2: 8192-Token General-Purpose Text Embeddings for Long Documents,” Feb. 2024, arXiv:2310.19923 [cs]. [Online]. Available: http://arxiv.org/abs/2310.19923 [45] “Introducing Nomic Embed: A Truly Open Embedding Model.” [Online]. Available: https://www.nomic.ai/blog/posts/nomic-embed-tex t-v1 [46] “snowflake-arctic-embed2:568m.” [Online]. Available: https://ollama.c om/snowflake-arctic-embed2:568m [47] “Snowflake launches text-embedding model for retrieval use cases.” [Online]. Available: https://www.snowflake.com/content/snowflake-site/ global/en/blog/introducing-snowflake-arctic-embed-snowflakes-state-o f-the-art-text-embedding-family-of-models [48] “unclemusclez/jina-embeddings-v2-base-code:q8.” [Online]. Available: https://ollama.com/unclemusclez/jina-embeddings-v2-base-code:q8