Title: TORCH: Characterizing Invalid Route Filtering via Tunnelled Observation

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.29207v1

Published Time: Wed, 01 Apr 2026 00:27:23 GMT

Number of Pages: 17

Markdown Content:
# TORCH: Characterizing Invalid Route Filtering via Tunnelled Observation 

# Renrui Tian 

Tsinghua University Beijing, China 

# Yahui Li ∗

Tsinghua University Beijing, China 

# Xia Yin 

Tsinghua University Beijing, China 

# Han Zhang 

Tsinghua University Beijing, China 

# Xingang Shi 

Tsinghua University Beijing, China 

# Zhiliang Wang 

Tsinghua University Beijing, China 

## Abstract 

To mitigate BGP prefix hijacking, the Resource Public Key In-frastructure (RPKI) provides prefix origin authentication via Route Origin Validation (ROV). Despite extensive measure-ment efforts in IPv4, the protective impact of ROV in IPv6 has yet to be systematically assessed. Existing approaches suffer from limited observability into invalid route propagation: they often rely on a small set of controlled prefixes or cannot fully profile the filtering of in-the-wild RPKI-invalid routes, which undermines the accuracy of assessment. Furthermore, the inherent opacity of the IPv6 data plane exacerbates the difficulty of performing scalable and reliable active measure-ments. In this paper, we present TORCH , a novel framework for measuring invalid route filtering in IPv6. It repurposes open 6in4 tunnel endpoints as widely distributed vantage points for global measurement. At its core, we develop a cross-plane inference technique that determines reachability without requiring responsive targets. This method allows us to char-acterize whether and how traffic is steered to invalid origins across diverse routing scenarios, leading to an in-depth eval-uation of the real-world impact of ROV. Our measurements reveal that about 27% of ASes have achieved nearly full ROV protection. However, several per-missive Tier-1 ASes still transit traffic towards invalid origins, maintaining a substantial attack surface. Through a prefix-centric analysis, we provide the first empirical evidence that the collateral damage of same-length prefix filtering can af-fect a significant fraction of the global Internet. Our findings pinpoint fundamental vulnerabilities in ROV deployment and underscore the urgent necessity for network operators to accelerate RPKI adoption. We make our datasets publicly available. 

## CCS Concepts 

• Security and privacy → Network security .

> ∗Yahui Li is the corresponding author of this paper.

## Keywords 

RPKI; Route Origin Validation; IPv6 Security 

## 1 Introduction 

BGP hijacking. The Internet comprises tens of thousands of interconnected Autonomous Systems (ASes) that exchange reachability information through the Border Gateway Pro-tocol (BGP). Within each AS, border routers originate an-nouncements declaring how to reach IP prefixes they own. However, because BGP provides no native mechanism to authenticate the origin of routing announcements, any AS can falsely claim to originate a prefix it does not legitimately control, thereby diverting the traffic destined for that prefix to its own network. Such incidents, known as prefix hijacking ,occur regularly in the wild [13, 32, 36, 40, 50, 55, 56]. 

RPKI-based mitigation. To mitigate prefix hijacking, the IETF standardized the Resource Public Key Infrastruc-ture (RPKI) [ 33 ], which binds IP prefixes to their legitimate origin ASes through cryptographically signed Route Origin Authorizations (ROAs). These ROAs are published in globally accessible RPKI repositories and retrieved by relying-party (RP) validators. For RPKI to provide effective protection, pub-lished ROAs must be actively used by Route Origin Validation (ROV) on routers. ASes that deploy ROV configure their bor-der routers to fetch validated ROA payloads (VRPs) from RP caches and use them to classify incoming BGP announce-ments, discarding routes that fail origin validation. 

Limited ROV deployment. The effectiveness of RPKI depends on both the correctly signed ROAs and the consis-tent enforcement of ROV across ASes. Although ROA adop-tion has grown rapidly in recent years, ROV deployment has advanced much more slowly. This limited enforcement greatly reduces the protective value of RPKI, which requires consistent origin validation across ASes to prevent bogus an-nouncements from propagating. Recent measurements [ 30 ]show that fewer than 30% of user addresses reside in net-works that filter RPKI-invalid routes. As a result, a significant portion of the global routing infrastructure remains vulnera-ble to potential hijacks, and even prefixes covered by ROAs 

> arXiv:2603.29207v1 [cs.NI] 31 Mar 2026 Renrui Tian et al.

may still be misrouted by networks that do not implement ROV. Hence, it is important to understand where and how ROV protection is actually taking effect on the real Internet. 

Gaps in ROV measurements. Accurately assessing the ROV status of an AS is non-trivial, as it requires inferring private routing policies from external observations. Prior studies [ 11 , 28 , 35 , 49 , 52 ] have attempted to infer ROV en-forcement in IPv4, yet a comprehensive understanding of ROV status in IPv6 remains elusive. Moreover, they suffer from inherent limitations and face significant hurdles when migrating to IPv6: First, existing approaches are constrained by limited ob-servation into invalid route propagation . They often rely on a small number of RPKI-invalid prefixes, which are either self-hosted [ 14 , 28 , 30 , 49 , 52 ] or identified in the wild [ 11 , 20 , 35 ,58 ]. Such a narrow set of invalid prefixes fails to capture the diverse upstream providers or peering relationships through which invalid announcements can reach the AS under study, leading to potential measurement bias and incorrect evalua-tion of ROV protection. Second, the inherent opacity of the IPv6 data plane hinders active probing. The vast and sparse address space imposes a profound spatial opacity , making it difficult to locate respon-sive targets within a prefix. Even when discovered, targets are often transient due to privacy extensions and tempo-rary addressing [ 22 , 43 , 44 ]. This temporal opacity causes targets to vanish between probing steps, increasing the mea-surement effort. Furthermore, mandatory ICMPv6 rate limit-ing [ 26 ] and explicit filtering [ 5 , 16 , 24 ] suppresses responses and causes frequent missing hops in traces [ 1 , 6]. Such topo-logical opacity impedes efficient measurements at scale. 

Contributions. With the rapid surge in IPv6 traffic [ 2 , 18 ,23 ], it is imperative to evaluate BGP routing security across the IPv6 Internet. We argue that an accurate characterization of IPv6 ROV necessitates three fundamental requirements: (1) large-scale vantage points to cover a diverse set of ASes, (2) sufficient visibility into invalid route propagation to fully profile filtering behaviors, and (3) an efficient measurement technique to illuminate the opaque IPv6 data plane. To this end, we develop TORCH , a novel framework for measuring invalid route filtering in IPv6. In particular, it leverages open 6in4 tunnel endpoints as vantage points to enable global-scale measurement. At its core, we propose a cross-plane reachability inference technique that does not require re-sponsive targets and is resilient to rate limiting and filtering policies. This method enables us to characterize whether and how traffic is steered to invalid origins across various routing scenarios, capturing a wide range of invalid prefixes. Our key contributions are summarized as follows: 

• Utilization of open tunnels: We transform open 6in4 tunnel endpoints into active probing vantage points ca-pable of performing traceroute measurements, covering over 2k networks. Our work enables a new perspective for active measurements in IPv6. 

• Cross-plane reachability inference: We infer the reach-ability of a prefix by correlating control-plane information with data-plane traces. This approach avoids the discovery of active targets within the prefix, and enables resilient verification even when forwarding paths are only partially visible. The technique is applicable to both IPv4 and IPv6. 

• Characterization of IPv6 ROV: By measuring the reach-ability of over 200 active RPKI-invalid prefixes, we evalu-ate the ROV protection of over 1,600 ASes. Our findings demonstrate that no more than 27% of ASes are effectively protected and quantify the actual propagation of invalid routes, exposing significant gaps in IPv6 RPKI deployment. 

• Evidence of RPKI collateral damage: We provide the first empirical evidence that collateral damage under same-length prefix filtering affects a significant fraction of the global Internet. To mitigate such risks, we underscore the necessity of proactive data-plane monitoring to identify unintended reachability issues. To facilitate reproducibility and support further research, we will make our code and datasets publicly available. 

## 2 Related Work 2.1 Passive Measurements 

Early efforts to assess ROV deployment primarily relied on passive analysis of control-plane data. Gilad et al. [ 20 ] demon-strated that ROV adoption was nearly absent among the top 100 ISPs, underscoring the limited security benefits of RPKI when core networks do not filtering invalid routes. Subse-quent research [ 57 ] leveraged longitudinal BGP datasets to evaluate the benefits of RPKI registration and track deploy-ment trends, reporting a gradual increase in invalid route filtering, particularly among large ISPs. Du et al. [ 17 ] uti-lized public routing datasets to examine whether MANRS participants adhere to established routing security require-ments. However, Reuter et al. [ 49 ] cautioned that passive observations on the control plane often lack sufficient visi-bility into internal routing decisions, potentially leading to the misidentification of ROV-enabled ASes. 

## 2.2 Active Measurements 

To address the limited visibility of passive observation, subse-quent works have transitioned towards active measurements that proactively exercise RPKI-specific routing behaviors. 

Experiments with controlled prefixes. A primary ac-tive strategy involves researchers announcing prefixes under their control while intentionally registering conflicting ROAs to make their BGP announcements invalid. Reuter et al. [ 49 ]TORCH: Characterizing Invalid Route Filtering via Tunnelled Observation 

pioneered this approach via the PEERING testbed [ 53 ], re-vealing that only a handful of ASes consistently performed filtering at the time. Follow-up studies [ 27 , 28 , 52 ] have in-tegrated data-plane measurements by utilizing distributed probing platforms such as RIPE Atlas [ 51 ]. By analyzing traceroute paths, they enable the fine-grained attribution of filtering behaviors to specific ASes. Alternative schemes [ 10 , 14 , 30 ] adopt a more straight-forward approach by testing reachability to their controlled RPKI-invalid prefixes on the data plane. Cloudflare’s Is BGP Safe Yet? project [ 14 ] serves web resources from two pre-fixes with identical routing properties except for their RPKI validity. By attempting to fetch both resources, it identifies RPKI-based filtering based on whether the valid resource is accessible but the invalid one is not. Similarly, APNIC [ 30 ]launchs a user-centric measurement by embedding measure-ment scripts in Google Ads. It directs end-user browsers to fetch both RPKI-valid and RPKI-invalid beacons, thereby detecting filtering behavior at a global scale. 

Utilizing in-the-wild invalid prefixes. To avoid the requirement for controlled prefixes, some researchers [ 11 ,35 ] take advantage of invalid prefixes in the wild. Chen et al. [ 11 ] collected traceroute paths towards invalid prefixes and applied Bayesian inference to estimate ROV deployment across tens of thousands of ASes. Li et al. [ 35 ] leveraged the IP-ID side channel to infer reachability from remote hosts to invalid prefixes without requiring vantage points, achieving coverage of over 28k ASes. Despite these advancements, existing measurements only provide limited observation into invalid route propagation because they rely on a small number of test prefixes, which motivates the design of TORCH .

## 3 Overview 

In this section, we discuss the main challenges in implement-ing a large-scale ROV measurement system in IPv6. We then present an overview of how TORCH addresses these hurdles. Specifically, TORCH (1) exploits open 6in4 tunnel endpoints as vantage points for measurements at scale; (2) fully lever-ages in-the-wild prefixes with invalid routes to enhance the observation into invalid route propagation; and (3) correlates data-plane observations with control-plane routing informa-tion to accurately infer prefix reachability. 

## 3.1 Key Challenges 

Our goal is to characterize the ROV status of an AS by infer-ring its filtering behavior regarding invalid routes. To this end, we need to determine whether the AS maintains reacha-bility to prefixes with invalid routes. However, developing a robust measurement framework requires addressing several key challenges as follows. 

Challenge I: Lack of Large-Scale Vantage Points. The primary obstacle to large-scale measurement is securing widely distributed vantage points. While platforms such as RIPE Atlas [ 51 ] provide valuable coverage, they are bound by credit-based consumption models and strict quotas that throttle measurement throughput. These limitations under-mine the feasibility of generating daily snapshots of invalid route filtering globally. 

Challenge II: Insufficient Observation into Invalid Propagation. Existing measurements rely on only a small number of RPKI-invalid prefixes, either self-hosted [ 14 , 28 ,30 , 49 , 52 ] or in-the-wild [ 11 , 20 , 35 , 58 ]. However, such a narrow set of invalid prefixes provides only limited visibil-ity of invalid route propagation, because it fails to capture the diverse upstreams or peers through which other invalid announcements could be advertised to the AS under test. To improve the coverage of possible routing paths, Ro-Vista [ 35 ] takes advantage of in-the-wild invalid prefixes, while APNIC [ 30 ] adopts another approach that uses RPKI beacons operated by Cloudflare at their extensive global points of presence. Both efforts aim to reduce measurement bias introduced by upstream filtering and to obtain a more complete view of ROV protection. However, recent RoVista measurements show that the number of usable invalid pre-fixes has decreased over time, typically remaining under five and sometimes dropping to only two. This scarcity of invalid prefixes greatly undermines the reliability of ROV assessment. 

Challenge III: Opacity of the IPv6 Data Plane. To determine the reachability towards a target prefix, a straight-forward approach is to locate an active address within that prefix and probe it on the data plane. However, unlike IPv4, this task is substantially more challenging in IPv6 due to the inherent opacity of the address space and network topology, which hinders effective active probing. 

Lack of discoverable active targets. Finding a responsive address within an IPv6 prefix is inherently difficult due to the spatial opacity of the enormous and sparsely populated address space. This difficulty is further amplified for prefixes that have only invalid routes. Since some transit networks now enforce ROV and filter invalid announcements, these prefixes receive limited route propagation and thus exhibit low visibility. Consequently, for vantage points behind fil-tering networks, these prefixes are largely unreachable on the data plane, making it highly unlikely to find responsive hosts within them. 

Ephemeral and unstable addressing. Even if a responsive target within a prefix is identified, it is often short-lived due to privacy extensions and the use of temporary ad-dresses [ 22 , 43 , 44 ]. This temporal opacity makes such targets unreliable for measurement and increases the effort required Renrui Tian et al. Evaluation of ROV 

III. Result Analysis           

> AS 1 AS 3
> no route
> invalid route
> filtered
> AS 1 AS 3
> valid
> route
> AS 1 AS 3
> invalid
> route invalid route
> selected
> Prefix
> Prefix
> Prefix
> Large -Scale
> Traceroute Campaign
> IPv4
> 6in4 tunnel
> tunnel
> endpoint
> AS1
> encapsulated
> IPv6 probes
> hop 1 hop 2 hop N
> Traceroute to target prefix
> encapsulated
> IPv6 probes
> measurement
> controller
> no reply
> after hop N
> AS 3 AS 4 Origin the packet should
> reach the origin.
> Collaborate with control plane
> If there exists a route:

II. Active Measurement 

> Global IPv4 Scanning
> for Tunnel Discovery
> Extracting
> RPKI -Invalid Prefixes

I. Bootstrapping     

> IPv6
> probes
> AS2 AS3
> What fraction of invalid
> prefixes is filtered?
> ROV protection
> assessment
> RIBs target
> prefixes prefix filter
> route
> information
> RPKI
> validation What is the impact
> of the invalid prefix?
> Impact analysis
> of invalid prefixes
> valid route
> selected

Figure 1: Overview of TORCH .

to discover usable active hosts, as targets may vanish be-tween measurement steps. 

Mandatory rate limiting and ICMP filtering. Tools such as traceroute rely on ICMP error messages to resolve for-warding paths hop by hop. However, mandatory rate lim-iting [ 26 ] suppresses a substantial portion of ICMPv6 re-sponses and has been shown to cause frequent missing hops in traces [ 1 , 6 ] that manifest as topological opacity . This in-troduces a fundamental trade-off: while higher probing rates are essential for large-scale measurements, they trigger ag-gressive rate limiting that paradoxically compromises hop visibility. Besides, explicit ICMP filtering by network opera-tors exacerbates this lack of path transparency [5, 16, 24]. 

## 3.2 System Design 

To systematically address the challenges outlined above, 

TORCH incorporates three core design components. 

Design I: Repurposing Permissive Tunnels as Van-tage Points. To address the scarcity of vantage points, TORCH 

employs a strategic exploitation of open 6in4 tunnel end-points. We identify permissive endpoints hosted in networks that lack outbound Source Address Validation (SAV) and leverage their inherent forwarding capability to inject mea-surement probes. This approach effectively transforms pas-sive infrastructure nodes into active remote vantage points. Capitalizing on the widespread distribution of tunnels, we acquire broad coverage spanning over 2k ASes. Moreover, our work also establishes a valuable practice for utilizing 6in4 tunnel endpoints in active measurement. 

Design II: Maximizing Utility of In-the-Wild Invalid Prefixes. TORCH enhances the visibility of invalid route propagation by maximizing the utility of invalid prefixes in the wild. We significantly expand the pool of candidate pre-fixes by incorporating invalid prefixes often deemed unusable by prior studies [11 , 35 ]. In particular, TORCH includes (i) exclusively invalid prefixes for which no responsive hosts can be discovered, (ii) invalid prefixes with competing valid routes (i.e., MOAS conflicts), and (iii) invalid prefixes cov-ered by less-specific valid routes. This allows TORCH to observe route propagation from a wide spread of invalid ori-gins, leading to a comprehensive characterization of invalid route filtering. 

Design III: Inferring Reachability via Cross-Plane Path Alignment. TORCH pioneers a strategy of cross-plane path alignment to infer prefix reachability. Instead of exam-ining each plane separately, TORCH orchestrates a collabora-tion between data-plane probing and control-plane routing information. This approach elevates verification from IP-level responsiveness to AS-level path visibility, and leverages routing knowledge to fill observation gaps on the data plane. This collaborative design circumvents the dependency on dis-coverable active targets, enabling TORCH to robustly char-acterize prefix reachability even in partially visible traces. Together, TORCH presents a framework to characterize in-valid route filtering in IPv6, as illustrated in Figure 1. First, it leverages open 6in4 tunnel endpoints as global vantage points and identifies a diverse set of RPKI-invalid prefixes from Routing Information Base (RIB) data. Next, TORCH ex-ecutes a large-scale traceroute campaign towards target pre-fixes, employing cross-plane inference to determine whether traffic is delivered to invalid origins. Finally, TORCH sup-ports an AS-centric assessment of ROV protection and a prefix-centric analysis of the real-world impact of invalid prefixes. 

## 4 Methodology 

This section details the implementation of TORCH . We elab-orate on the technical specifics of exploiting 6in4 tunnel TORCH: Characterizing Invalid Route Filtering via Tunnelled Observation 

endpoints, the mechanics of cross-plane reachability infer-ence, and the rigorous strategies employed to maximize the utility of in-the-wild invalid announcements. 

## 4.1 Exploiting 6in4 Tunnels 

To obtain a diverse and widely distributed set of vantage points for measurement, we leverage 6in4 tunnel endpoints available in the wild. In particular, we identify endpoints hosted in networks that do not enforce IPv6 outbound SAV [ 54 ], and repurpose these permissive tunnel nodes as vantage points to conduct data-plane measurements. 

4.1.1 Permissive 6in4 Tunnel Endpoints. The 6in4 protocol [ 21 ]is a tunneling mechanism that encapsulates IPv6 packets in-side IPv4 packets. Upon receiving an encapsulated packet, a 6in4 endpoint removes the outer IPv4 header and for-wards the inner IPv6 packet according to its IPv6 routing state. Despite the reduced operational relevance of 6in4 amid widespread native IPv6 deployment, previous measure-ments [ 25 , 31 ] demonstrate that many open tunnel nodes still remain active in the wild. Outbound SAV is designed to prevent networks from orig-inating packets with bogus source addresses. Although out-bound SAV can effectively mitigate IP spoofing, both prior work [ 25 ] and our measurements showcase a pervasive ab-sence of outbound filtering: most detected 6in4 tunnels are hosted in networks that lack outbound SAV, which means they can forward IPv6 packets with arbitrary source ad-dresses. This permissive behavior enables us to craft IPv6 probes for active measurement and send them through the 6in4 tunnels. 

4.1.2 Traceroute with Tunnel Endpoints. With a known 6in4 tunnel endpoint in the absence of outbound SAV, we can perform IPv6 traceroute from the perspective of its hosting AS by exploiting its IPv6 routing capability. In effect, the endpoint forwards our probes as if they originated locally, enabling us to observe the traces from its network towards any target. For each hop limit, we construct an ICMPv6 Echo Request 

with our server’s IPv6 address as the source and the target under test as the destination. We then wrap the IPv6 packet with an IPv4 header, using our server’s IPv4 address as the outer source and the endpoint’s IPv4 address as the outer destination. When the endpoint receives the packet, it strips the outer IPv4 header and forwards the inner IPv6 probe, thereby initiating a traceroute from within its AS. Since the probe’s IPv6 source address is set to our server, any ICMPv6 responses (e.g., Time Exceeded , Destination Unreachable , or 

Echo Reply ) generated along the path are delivered directly back to us. This allows us to reconstruct the routing path from the endpoint towards the target. 

## 4.2 Cross-Plane Reachability Inference 

We present our cross-plane reachability inference technique, a Routing-Connectivity Hybrid method that integrates control-plane routing information ( routing ) with data-plane traces (connectivity ). This technique allows us to determine the reachability of a prefix without requiring responsive hosts, thereby overcoming the opacity of the IPv6 data plane. Our method is motivated by two key observations: 

Resilience of AS-level visibility. First, we observe that 

while IPv6 traceroute often suffer from missing hops due to rate limiting or filtering policies, AS-level visibility is compar-atively more resilient . When traversing a transit AS, a packet is typically forwarded by a sequence of multiple routers. Al-though individual routers may suppress ICMP generation, there remains a high probability of receiving at least one reply from within the AS. As a result, even if the hop-level trace is fragmented, the forwarding path observed at the AS level maintains superior integrity. 

Bridging visibility gaps with control-plane informa-tion. Second, we leverage the key insight that control-plane routing information can effectively fill the gaps in data-plane visibility . Now that we focus on AS granularity, we can verify prefix reachability by observing whether the packet enters the origin AS. However, some ASes may still be missing from the trace, especially during high-frequency measurement campaigns where aggressive probing can trigger stricter rate limiting. The implication is that all responses from an AS may be suppressed, resulting in the absence of the AS in the path. This opacity is particularly problematic when the termi-nal AS is silent, as sole reliance on data-plane views makes it impossible to disambiguate real unreachability from silence induced by rate limiting or filtering practices. Fortunately, we note that routing data collected by the public BGP platform can illuminate this ambiguity. Our inference is based on the consistency between control-plane advertisements and data-plane forwarding. Specifically, if a packet is observed entering an AS which is observed to have a route towards the target prefix, it falls under the active forwarding logic of that AS and is expected to be routed towards the destination. Therefore, even if the subsequent data-plane path is invisible, the control plane confirms the AS’s intent and capability to route the packet to the destination. Building on our insights, we implement a collaborative inference mechanism that correlates the observed entry point 

from the data plane with the forwarding continuity guaran-teed by the control plane. This process involves two phases: 

1. Data-plane anchoring. We initiate traceroute probes towards a random address within the target prefix. We do not require the target host to be active; rather, our goal is to ex-tract the visible portion of the forwarding path. By mapping responsive IP hops to ASNs, we reconstruct the sequence of Renrui Tian et al. unseen link AS 2 AS 4        

> (Origin)
> VP R1
> Control Plane (RIB data)
> Data Plane (traceroute)
> missing hops Target Prefix
> AS 3 AS 1
> Observed Path: AS2→AS3→AS4
> Observed Path: AS1→AS2→AS3
> R4
> AS 1 AS 2 AS 3
> R2 R3

Figure 2: Cross-plane reachability inference: correlat-ing partial data-plane traces with control-plane routing paths to determine reachability. 

traversed networks and establish a data-plane anchor that confirms the furthest observed point of forwarding. 

2. Control-plane extrapolation. We then validate the reachability by cross-referencing the anchor with global BGP RIB data. We compile the set of AS paths to the target prefix as advertised on the control plane. The prefix is inferred as reachable if the data-plane anchor appears as a node on any control-plane path. This alignment implies that the packet has been successfully handed over to an AS committed to forwarding it to the destination, thereby bridging the gap caused by downstream silence on the data plane. Figure 2 illustrates a collaborative example where we test a prefix originated by AS4. We initiate a traceroute from a vantage point in AS1 towards the prefix and map the re-sponsive hops to an AS path. As shown, the data-plane trace terminates prematurely at AS3 due to missing hops, so we identify AS3 as the anchor. By consulting the control plane, we verify that this anchor appears on a valid routing path 

AS2 AS3 AS4 . The verified arrival at the anchor, combined with the assurance of downstream connectivity provided by the control plane, justifies the inference of reachability. Notably, since the forwarding path after the anchor is invisible, we do not intend to pinpoint potential reachability issues (e.g., routing loops, blackholes, or ACL rules) within the silent hops. Instead, our primary goal is to validate the forwarding intent of the source network, and this inference provides sufficient granularity for our study. 

## 4.3 Revisiting Invalid Prefixes In the Wild 

In order to achieve a comprehensive assessment of invalid route filtering, we maximize the use of in-the-wild prefixes with invalid announcements. Figure 3 shows that the number of origin ASes that originate invalid routes remains stable, which corresponds to a steady population of invalid prefixes. This longitudinal stability ensures a reliable and consistent target set for our measurement. 

4.3.1 Limited to Responsive Exclusively Invalid Prefixes. Us-ing RPKI-invalid prefixes for ROV measurement without 2025-11-01 2025-11-15 2025-12-01 2025-12-15 2025-12-31  

> 0
> 50k
> 100k
> 150k
> 200k
> # of announcements  Invalid announcements Invalid prefixes
> 12k
> 14k
> 16k
> 18k
> # of prefixes

Figure 3: The number of invalid prefixes and invalid announcements. 

careful selection can introduce significant bias. As estab-lished by prior studies [ 11 , 35 ], a prefix associated with in-valid routes may remain reachable from ROV-enforcing ASes if an alternative valid route exists. This typically occurs in two scenarios: (1) Competing Valid Origin (MOAS): A prefix may be si-multaneously announced by another AS with a valid ROA. This allows traffic to be routed towards the legitimate origin via a valid route. (2) Covering Valid Route: A less-specific prefix is announced by a valid origin. If the more-specific invalid route is filtered, the covering valid route provides a fallback forwarding path to maintain reachability. In these scenarios, reachability observations become ambigu-ous: traffic may be directed to a legitimate origin via a valid route if ROV is enforced, or delivered to the unauthorized origin if an invalid route is accepted. Therefore, reachability alone cannot distinguish between these two distinct forward-ing behaviors. To avoid misinterpretation, previous measurements [ 11 ,35 , 58 ] restrict their analysis to prefixes exclusively announced by invalid origins and require responsive targets within each prefix for data-plane probing. However, this dual constraint dramatically shrinks the usable measurement surface. In practice, the pool of candidate prefixes is drastically dimin-ished as many exclusively invalid prefixes do not expose any responsive targets. For instance, recent RoVista mea-surements [ 35 ] were able to use only two test prefixes out of 1,098 exclusively invalid prefixes in IPv4. 

4.3.2 Towards a Full Characterization of Invalid Prefixes. We argue that the scarcity of usable target prefixes primarily stems from the inherent limitations of traditional data-plane probing: it requires responsive hosts within the prefix, and it cannot distinguish which route actually carries the traffic when both valid and invalid routes exist. In contrast, we derive substantial benefit from our cross-plane inference, which decouples reachability from host responsiveness and provides the AS-level visibility sufficient to disambiguate TORCH: Characterizing Invalid Route Filtering via Tunnelled Observation 

forwarding paths. By overcoming these hurdles, we can fully utilize exclusively invalid prefixes and reclaim usable prefixes from complex scenarios that were previously discarded. We partition the invalid prefixes into three categories: 

Type I: exclusively invalid prefixes. This category con-sists of prefixes that are announced solely by invalid origins and have neither concurrent valid announcements nor valid covering prefixes. Since no valid route exists, reachability in this context serves as a deterministic indicator of the absence of ROV filtering. By employing cross-plane inference mech-anism, TORCH accurately determines the reachability for the entirety of these prefixes, without the need to discover active hosts or open ports. AS 4   

> AS 1
> AS 3
> AS 2
> AS 7 AS 5
> AS 6
> AS 8
> AS1 exclusive catchment overlap AS2 exclusive catchment

Figure 4: Illustration of catchment-based disambigua-tion. We infer reachability to the unauthorized origin (AS2) only when the data-plane anchor falls within its exclusive catchment (red zone), discarding anchors in the overlapping region (yellow zone). Type II: prefixes with competing valid origins. In this case, an invalid announcement coexists with a valid one of the same prefix length . Simple connectivity tests can-not distinguish whether probes reach the legitimate or the unauthorized origin, as both advertise the exact same prefix. 

TORCH resolves this ambiguity by leveraging the key ob-servation that competing origins often create distinct catch-ments (i.e., the set of ASes that select and forward traffic to a specific origin based on BGP path selection). We explicitly delineate the catchments with their associated origins by aggregating global routing information on the control plane. To determine the destination, we refine our cross-plane in-ference to identify a data-plane anchor that falls within a specific catchment. Recognizing that catchments may over-lap, we confirm that traffic follows the invalid path if and only if the anchor can be exclusively attributed to the catch-ment of the invalid origin. This conservative verification ensures that the probe is following an invalid route. Figure 4 illustrates this process. Assume that AS1 is the legitimate origin and AS2 is the unauthorized one. The topol-ogy is partitioned into three distinct zones: the exclusive catchment of AS1 (green zone), the exclusive catchment of AS2 (red zone), and the overlapping region (yellow zone). To avoid uncertainty, we infer reachability to the invalid origin if and only if the anchor falls within its exclusive catchment (red zone). For instance, an anchor in AS7 serves as definitive proof of reaching AS2, whereas an anchor in the overlapping AS6 is discarded. 

Type III: prefixes with valid covering routes. In this context, a more-specific prefix with invalid routes is covered by a less-specific prefix with valid routes. Although the more-specific route should be prioritized by the longest prefix match, the presence of the valid covering route can mask the invalid route when both routes share an identical segment of AS paths. In such cases, traffic forwarded along the invalid route traverses the same ASes as the covering valid route. This topological overlap prevents unambiguous attribution of reachability to the invalid route. 

TORCH imposes three constraints to ensure rigorous at-tribution. First, we exclude prefixes whose invalid and valid covering routes originate from ASes that are topologically or administratively coupled (e.g., customer–provider rela-tionships, common upstreams, or the same organization). Second, we adopt the catchment-based strategy introduced for Type II and limit our inference exclusively to catchments where the invalid route is observed in the absence of the cov-ering valid route. Third, if packets are observed to transit the origin AS of the less-specific prefix, or the direct upstream provider of that origin, we infer that the traffic is likely to first reach the origin AS of the less-specific prefix and is then carried over private backbones or other interconnect fabrics to the destination. In such cases, the observed reachability should be attributed to the covering valid route. By applying these elaborated strategies, TORCH signifi-cantly broadens the diversity of measurable invalid origins. This expanded visibility underpins a more comprehensive and accurate assessment of ROV filtering. 

## 5 Measurement 

In this section, we describe the end-to-end workflow of our measurement campaign. We detail how we construct our tunnel-based vantage point infrastructure, select target pre-fixes with invalid routes, and launch large-scale traceroute probing for subsequent analysis. 

## 5.1 Obtaining Tunnel Endpoints 

To establish our vantage point infrastructure, we follow the discovery methodology established in [ 25 ] and perform an exhaustive scan of the entire IPv4 address space. This process yields 1,048,273 permissive tunnel endpoints, comparable in scale to [ 25 ]. Subsequently, we characterize their geographic distribution and AS affiliation, thereby assessing the cover-age and diversity of our vantage points. Renrui Tian et al. 

IPv4 Distribution. We map the identified endpoints to 2,116 distinct IPv4 ASes using the RouteViews prefix to AS mapping dataset [ 9 ]. Further analysis via the Stanford ASdb Dataset [ 60 ] reveals that 1,828 (86.4%) of these ASes are ISPs, indicating that our vantage points effectively cover access and eyeball networks where tunnel endpoints are predom-inantly deployed. For geographic profiling, we employ the MaxMind GeoLite2 databases [ 41 ] and observe that these tunnel endpoints exhibit a global footprint spanning 115 countries (as shown in Figure 10), which provides broad Inter-net coverage and supports capturing heterogeneous routing behaviors across regions in subsequent measurements. 

IPv6 Attribution. Since the IPv4 and IPv6 interfaces of a tunnel endpoint may be provisioned by different ASes, naively equating their AS affiliations can lead to misattribu-tion [ 25 ]. To avoid this pitfall, we perform active measure-ments to infer the IPv6 AS that provides connectivity for each tunnel endpoint. Using a combination of direct IPv6 ad-dress discovery and traceroute-based inference (as detailed in Appendix A), we successfully attribute 777,667 (74%) tunnel endpoints to 1,349 IPv6 ASes. 

## 5.2 Characterizing RPKI-Invalid Prefixes 

We retrieve the latest BGP RIB snapshots from RouteViews [ 47 ]to construct our candidate prefixes. We first sanitize the raw routing tables by excluding routes associated with reserved or private ASNs and prefixes. We then perform validation using Routinator [ 45 ] to identify invalid announcements. To filter out artifacts of local routing policies and transient con-figurations, we retain only prefixes whose invalid routes are observed by more than three collectors, ensuring that the selected prefixes have sufficient global visibility. As described in Section 4.3, we apply additional filters to obtain reliable targets. First, we identify exclusively invalid prefixes that lack any corresponding valid route. Second, we remove prefixes whose invalid and valid origin ASes belong to the same organization using the AS to Organization mapping dataset [ 12 ]. Third, for MOAS prefixes, we discard cases where the invalid and valid catchments overlap by more than 20%, as limited catchment separation undermines reliable inference. Finally, for prefixes with valid covering routes, we exclude instances where the invalid and valid routes are tightly coupled. Specifically, we remove prefixes if the origin of one announcement appears on the AS path of the other, or if both routes are propagated via the same upstream provider. As shown in Table 1, we obtain 328 prefixes from 164 invalid origins on November 30, 2025. In order to assess the diversity of our measurement targets, we further characterize both their geographic footprint and network properties.                   

> Category Prefixes Ratio (%) Origin ASes
> Exclusively Invalid 284 86.6% 134 MOAS Only 16 4.9% 13 Covered Only 22 6.7% 20 MOAS & Covered 61.8% 5
> Total 328 100.0% 164

Table 1: Statistics of target prefixes and their unique origin ASes as of November 30, 2025. 10 

> 20
> 30
> 40
> 50
> 60
> # of invalid origins

Figure 5: Global presence of the ASes originating in-valid routes for the target prefixes. Geographic distribution. As illustrated in Figure 5, the invalid origins exhibit a global presence across all major regions. Notably, we observe that the density of invalid ori-gins is correlated with the extent of regional IPv6 adoption. We identify a significantly higher concentration of invalid origins in nations with advanced IPv6 deployment, such as India, the United States, and China. In contrast, we observe minimal invalid origin ASes in the African region, which generally lags behind in IPv6 development. 

Network characteristics. We examine the invalid origins by their network types and hierarchical positions. Using the Stanford ASdb Dataset [ 60 ], we find that 98 of the 164 invalid origins (60%) are ISPs. We then obtain their rankings with the CAIDA AS Rank dataset [ 8 ]. The results show that these ASes span a wide range of the hierarchy, from major Tier-1 and Tier-2 providers to smaller regional ISPs and stub networks. This extensive geographic footprint and hierarchical diver-sity ensures that measurements are not skewed by regional policies or network tiers. By targeting diverse origins, from large-scale transit providers to regional edge networks, we can systematically characterize how invalid routes are prop-agated and filtered across heterogeneous networks. 

## 5.3 Large-Scale Traceroute Campaign 

We conduct large-scale traceroute measurements from dis-tributed tunnel endpoints to target prefixes. While our cross-plane reachability inference is designed to be resilient, naively TORCH: Characterizing Invalid Route Filtering via Tunnelled Observation 

scaling traceroutes from millions of sources to hundreds of destinations incurs prohibitive overhead and exacerbates rate limiting, which can obscure responses and bias inference. To balance coverage with probing efficiency, we refine our measurement setup by strategically selecting target prefixes and vantage points. 

Target clustering. We reduce redundancy by clustering candidate prefixes that are control-plane equivalent. Specifi-cally, we group prefixes whose AS paths are identical across all route collectors, and select one representative prefix per cluster for active probing. This avoids redundant probes and concentrates our probing budget on distinct networks. 

Vantage point sampling. We first discard tunnel nodes that modify inner packet headers (e.g., rewriting the source address or resetting the hop limit), as such behavior disrupt traceroute semantics and prevents reliable ICMP response correlation. We then stratify the remaining nodes based on their IPv6 ASN, or alternatively their IPv4 ASN or prefix, and randomly sample up to three vantage points per group. Finally, the resulting setup involves an average of 5,316 tunnel nodes and 216 target prefixes per day. To ensure reliable inference at scale while limiting prob-ing overhead, we carefully orchestrate the execution of our traceroute campaign. We configure traceroute probes with a maximum hop limit of 20, which is empirically sufficient to capture most inter-domain routing paths. To prevent traffic bursts and mitigate rate limiting, we employ round-robin scheduling across all pairs of sources and destinations. Fi-nally, we execute multiple probing rounds to enhance hop discovery and mitigate transient network issues. 

## 5.4 Assessing ROV Protection 

Consistent with previous work [ 35 ], we introduce the ROV score to quantify the effectiveness of filtering against invalid routes. Instead of inferring whether an AS explicitly deploys ROV, we evaluate its resilience to invalid route propagation. Specifically, the ROV score is defined as the fraction of target prefixes for which traffic from the AS cannot reach an invalid origin. A high score means that invalid origins are unreach-able for most prefixes, indicating strong protection, whether enforced locally by the AS or inherited from upstream fil-tering. Conversely, a low score indicates that traffic can still be steered to invalid origins for many prefixes, suggesting weak or inconsistent filtering along the forwarding paths. 

## 6 Results 

In this section, we present the results of our large-scale tracer-oute campaign between December 17 and December 27, 2025. 

## 6.1 Global Status of ROV 

We begin by examining the overall state of ROV protection across the measured IPv6 networks. During our campaign, 

TORCH captures 2,061 ASes, including both networks host-ing tunnel endpoints and intermediate ASes observed along forwarding paths. For intermediate ASes, since we cannot originate probes from these networks, our visibility is limited to the specific target prefixes whose corresponding tracer-outes happen to traverse the network. To ensure robust infer-ence and mitigate bias from insufficient sampling, we restrict our analysis to ASes for which we could evaluate reachability to at least 20 target prefixes. Finally, we focus on analyzing a consolidated dataset of 1,685 ASes. 0 20 40 60 80 100 

> ROV Score
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> CDF

Figure 6: CDF of ROV scores across all measured ASes. 

6.1.1 Distribution of ROV Scores. Figure 6 shows the cu-mulative distribution of ROV scores across measured ASes. 26.9% of ASes achieve near-complete protection (score > 0.9), effectively discarding invalid routes for the majority of target prefixes. In contrast, 30.4% of ASes exhibit a permissive pos-ture with scores below 0.5. These networks allow traffic to reach invalid origins for more than half of the target prefixes, leaving them significantly exposed to BGP hijacking threats. The remaining ASes exhibit partial protection, which can be attributed to inconsistent upstream filtering or selective enforcement. As noted in [ 35 ], such behavior often stems from relationship-driven exceptions (e.g., accepting invalid routes from customers), local overrides (e.g., SLURM [ 38 ]), or operational challenges encountered during deployment. 

6.1.2 ROV Status Across Continents. We investigate the ROV landscape across continents. As shown in Figure 7, ROV scores vary substantially by region. North America and Eu-rope are skewed towards high scores, indicating broadly con-sistent protection. Asia and South America exhibit much wider spreads, with an overall moderate level of protec-tion. Results for Oceania and Africa should be interpreted with caution due to limited coverage. Within our measur-able scope, Oceania tends to show high ROV filtering, while Africa exhibits a moderate protection. Overall, these findings Renrui Tian et al. 0          

> 20
> 40
> 60
> North America
> 0
> 40
> 80
> 120
> Europe
> 0
> 2
> 4
> 6
> Oceania
> 0
> 2
> 4
> Africa
> 020 40 60 80 100
> 0
> 25
> 50
> 75
> Asia
> 020 40 60 80 100
> 0
> 50
> 100
> 150
> South America
> # of ASes
> ROV Score

Figure 7: Distribution of ROV scores by continent. Red lines denote the median, and shaded regions span the first quartile (Q1) to the third quartile (Q3) for each region. 

confirm that the global ROV status remains geographically uneven. 

## 6.2 The Permissive Tier-1 ASes 

Tier-1 ASes constitute the Internet backbone and are piv-otal to global routing security. Previous research [ 20 , 28 , 35 ]underscores that the security benefit of RPKI is primarily driven by the collateral impact of ROV enforcement at the core. As universal transit providers, their filtering policies effectively dictate the propagation of invalid routes from the core to the global Internet. Therefore, we evaluate the effectiveness of ROV among 17 Tier-1 ASes. South America  

> Asia
> Europe
> North America
> Africa
> Oceania
> AS6762
> AS6453
> AS3257
> AS6461
> AS3356
> Other Tier-1
> Region Tier-1 AS

Figure 8: Several permissive Tier-1 ASes transit traffic from diverse regions to invalid origins, providing the reachability of invalid origins across their service re-gions. 

6.2.1 Inconsistent ROV Enforcement among Tier-1 ASes. Ta-ble 2 summarizes the ROV status of 17 Tier-1 networks as measured by TORCH . A few Tier-1 ASes demonstrate nearly full ROV enforcement. For instance, Deutsche Telekom (AS3320), Verizon (AS701), and AT&T (AS7018) filter out almost all in-valid routes. However, such strict protection is not ubiquitous across Tier-1 networks. Many operators still maintain lenient filtering policies. Notably, Level 3 (AS3356) is observed to divert traffic to invalid origins for over half of the target prefixes. This inconsistent enforcement of ROV at the Internet core introduces systemic risks to global routing security. As high-lighted in Figure 8, several permissive Tier-1 ASes are re-sponsible for transiting traffic from diverse continents to invalid origins. Due to the lack of strict ROV adoption, these networks maintain the reachability of invalid origins and allow such reachability to permeate their extensive service regions. This vulnerability is further amplified by the preva-lence of default routing [ 7 , 35 ]: even if an AS performs ROV locally, traffic may still be directed to invalid origins via a default route to a non-validating upstream provider, which compromises the benefit of local filtering. 

Rank ASN Organization Score 

1 3356 Level 3 Parent, LLC 40.2% 2 1299 Arelion Sweden AB 50.0% 3 174 Cogent Communications 73.6% 4 3257 GTT Communications Inc. 70.6% 5 2914 NTT America, Inc. 90.8% 6 6939 Hurricane Electric LLC 52.4% 7 6453 TATA Communications 71.4% 8 6461 Zayo Bandwidth 92.4% 9 6762 Telecom Italia Sparkle 59.6% 11 3491 PCCW Global, Inc. 69.6% 12 5511 Orange S.A. 96.4% 14 12956 TELXIUS Cable 89.0% 20 3320 Deutsche Telekom AG 99.1% 30 6830 Liberty Global 95.7% 31 7018 AT&T Enterprises, LLC 98.7% 33 701 Verizon 98.7% 101 209 CenturyLink Communications, LLC 97.6% 

Table 2: ROV scores of Tier-1 ASes. Some of them ex-hibit remarkably low ROV protection. 

6.2.2 Comparison with IPv4. To contextualize our findings, we compare our IPv6 results with recent studies on IPv4 ROV measurement. RoVista [ 35 ] reports that 16 out of 17 Tier-1 ASes exhibit high ROV protection, presenting an op-timistic view of the IPv4 core. However, our findings align more closely with the conservative assessment by [ 28 ], which identifies clear evidence of ROV enforcement in only 9 out of TORCH: Characterizing Invalid Route Filtering via Tunnelled Observation 

15 Tier-1 networks. This indicates that RoVista may overesti-mate the maturity of IPv4 ROV, which might be attributed to its limited set of test prefixes. By leveraging an expanded set of invalid prefixes, TORCH uncovers a more severe situation: non-uniform deployment of invalid route filtering leaves the IPv6 backbone largely permissive and vulnerable to prefix hijacking. 

## 6.3 Validation of Results 

Existing studies on ROV measurement primarily focus on IPv4. For IPv6, we find that the APNIC measurement project [ 30 ]provides a longitudinal benchmark of ROV filtering. We thus use APNIC results to validate our findings. 

6.3.1 Validation of Tier-1 ASes. We first evaluate TORCH 

against Tier-1 ASes with sufficient APNIC samples. For net-works maintaining stable filtering above 99% (AS3320, AS7018, AS701, and AS6830), TORCH consistently assigns high ROV scores. For networks with volatile filtering and repeated ob-servations far below 90%, with multiple observations far below 90% (AS174, AS3356, and AS1299), TORCH accurately identifies them as incompletely protected. In cases of sparse APNIC sampling in IPv6, we seek to cross-reference APNIC’s IPv4 benchmarks. The unstable or low IPv4 filtering observed in AS3257, AS3491, AS6453, and AS6762 indicates a likely corresponding incomplete ROV deployment in IPv6. Conversely, for AS12956 and AS5511, their consistently complete IPv4 filtering serves as indirect evidence of strict ROV enforcement. For these networks, 

TORCH fills a critical measurement gap by providing a stable assessment of their ROV status in IPv6. Several discrepancies between our findings and APNIC benchmarks highlight the limitations of measurements based on a single prefix, which often provide only a partial view of ROV protection. In contrast, TORCH offers a more com-prehensive and accurate assessment of ROV practices by evaluating reachability across a diverse set of invalid origins. A notable case is AS6939, where APNIC reports mostly high IPv6 filtering between 90% and 100%, with a single dip to 80% in the past two months. However, our traceroute results show that AS6939 can reach Cloudflare’s invalid prefix on 18% of the measurement days. This suggests that APNIC’s evaluation may be biased by its reliance on a single invalid prefix operated by Cloudflare. Similarly, AS6461 and AS2914 are consistently observed reaching Cloudflare’s prefixes, de-spite filtering the majority of other invalid routes. For AS209, while APNIC reports significant fluctuations of IPv6 filtering ranging from 50% to 90%, TORCH observes effective filter-ing in the majority of cases. Given that AS209 consistently performs high filtering in IPv4, we infer that ROV is also implemented in IPv6, yet it appears that some interfaces do not filter Cloudflare’s prefix. 

6.3.2 Large-Scale Validation. We extend our validation to 686 ASes, each with at least 10 APNIC samples. Applying a 90% threshold for both ROV scores and APNIC filtering rates, we classify each AS as completely or incompletely protected and evaluate the consistency between the two sets of labels. The results show that TORCH and APNIC are in agreement for 586 ASes (85.4%), including 518 ASes correctly identified as unprotected and 68 ASes confirmed to have strict ROV enforcement. The remaining 100 discrepancies (14.6%) underscore the limitations of APNIC evaluation. In 83 cases, TORCH iden-tifies active ROV enforcement while APNIC labels them as unprotected. Upon detailed investigation of traceroute results, we find that 71 of these ASes (85.5%) have not fil-tered Cloudflare’s invalid prefix, despite successfully block-ing other test prefixes. Besides, 17 ASes show ROV enforce-ment in APNIC but incomplete filtering in TORCH . These results demonstrate that single-prefix measurements can lead to both underestimation and overestimation of ROV protection, whereas TORCH provides a more robust and comprehensive characterization of ROV filtering. 

## 7 Invalid Origin Reachability 

In this section, we present a prefix-centric analysis to evalu-ate the impact of ROV filtering on the reachability of RPKI-invalid prefixes. To this end, we introduce a prefix-level met-ric, invalid reachability , to characterize the extent to which traffic is ultimately delivered to an invalid origin. Formally, for each prefix, we calculate its invalid reachability as the fraction of ASes from which packets are forwarded to the invalid origin. 

## 7.1 Characterization of Invalid Reachability 

Our analysis examines three types of RPKI-invalid prefixes as we discussed in Section 4.3: (i) exclusively invalid pre-fixes, (ii) MOAS prefixes with competing origins, and (iii) valid-covered prefixes with a less-specific valid route. For each type, we randomly sample 10 representative prefixes that remained consistently observable in our measurement. Figure 9 visualizes their invalid reachability over the mea-surement period. Notably, the reachability of several prefixes varies over time, which we analyze in detail in Appendix B. 

7.1.1 Exclusively Invalid Prefixes. Exclusively invalid pre-fixes exhibit highly diverse invalid reachability. As shown in Figure 9a, their reachability spans from complete isolation to high global reachability. While low reachability may indi-cate ROV filtering by the upstream providers of the invalid origins, the high accessibility of many other prefixes reveals the pervasive absence of strict ROV enforcement across the global Internet. For instance, Cloudflare advertises the in-valid prefix 2606:4700:7000::/48 from hundreds of points of Renrui Tian et al. Dec 17           

> 2025
> 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27
> 2606:4700:7000::/48
> 2a09:bac0:745::/48
> 2a12:5440:7::/48
> 2406:d440:ffff::/48
> 2401:7660::/48
> 2401:5180::/32
> 2607:f208:df0b::/48
> 2a00:1678:7331::/48
> 2a07:54c7:6010::/48
> 2407:a5c0:100::/48 0%
> 20%
> 40%
> 60%
> 80%
> 100%

(a) Exclusively invalid prefixes Dec 17            

> 2025
> 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27
> 2405:e100:c::/48
> 2803:ff20::/32
> 2a0e:dfc1::/32
> 2a0b:7ec0::/29
> 2a11:646::/32
> 2407:9640::/32
> 2401:8680:4100::/48
> 2a06:9f47::/32
> 2a0a:1f40::/29
> 2001:255::/32 0%
> 20%
> 40%
> 60%
> 80%
> 100%

(b) MOAS prefixes Dec 17            

> 2025
> 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27
> 2a06:a000:160::/44
> 2a06:a000:1d0::/44
> 2620:57:4004::/48
> 2a0b:a301::/32
> 2a0b:2a86::/32
> 2a06:a000:1e1::/48
> 2401:ce80:1001::/48
> 2a00:ee7::/48
> 2a12:de40:38::/48
> 2600:6c38:81c::/48 0%
> 20%
> 40%
> 60%
> 80%
> 100%

(c) Valid-covered prefixes 

Figure 9: Heatmap visualization of invalid reachability for sampled prefixes across three categories. Color encodes the fraction of ASes that can reach the invalid origin for each prefix over time, revealing distinct patterns across prefix types. 

presence (PoPs) worldwide [ 48 ]. The prefix’s invalid reach-ability consistently exceeds 84%, which implies that many networks and Internet Exchange Points (IXPs) fail to drop invalid routes, leaving a substantial attack surface for BGP hijacks. 

7.1.2 MOAS Prefixes. Figure 9b shows that MOAS prefixes generally maintain invalid reachability below 20% with only one exception (2405:e100:c::/48). This result can be attributed to both ROV filtering and route competition between valid and invalid origins. Specifically, even if an AS does not filter invalid routes, its local BGP decision process may still prefer the legitimate route (e.g., due to higher local preference or a shorter AS path), thereby directing traffic towards the valid origin. 

7.1.3 Valid-Covered Prefixes. For invalid prefixes covered by valid less-specific routes, we observe a moderate level of invalid reachability overall (Figure 9c), which is higher than that of MOAS prefixes. This is because more-specific invalid routes can propagate wider without same-length competition and are preferred over less-specific valid routes during forwarding. A case in point is the prefix 2620:57:4004::/48. We observe that AS37468 (Angola Cables), a global transit provider, ac-cepts both an invalid route to 2620:57:4004::/48 originated by AS38345 and a valid route to 2620:57:4000::/40 originated by AS62831. Our measurements further reveal that AS37468 transits traffic from 242 downstream ASes to the invalid ori-gin, accounting for 17.8% of all observed traffic to the prefix. This case also underscores how ROV implementation gaps in core transit networks can significantly exacerbate the im-pact of sub-prefix hijacking, even when the hijacked prefix is ostensibly protected by a ROA. 

## 7.2 What Is the Real Impact of Collateral Damage? 

Prior research [ 20 , 34 , 42 ] has identified collateral damage 

in the practice of ROV. This occurs when an AS correctly drops invalid routes on the control plane, yet its traffic is still routed to an invalid origin because its upstream provider does not enforce ROV. This issue stems from an inconsis-tency between control-plane route selection and data-plane forwarding behavior. Even if an AS selects a valid route, its upstream may still forward traffic towards an invalid des-tination based on local routing policies (e.g., more-specific routes, local preference, or AS path length). Since this di-version occurs after the next hop and the internal routing policies of upstream providers are often opaque, collateral damage constitutes a hidden attack surface that is largely invisible on the control plane. To mitigate this risk, existing works [ 34 , 42 ] infer the pres-ence of collateral damage by examining whether upstream ASes propagate invalid routes or enforce ROV, and accord-ingly select a safer upstream. However, they remain blind if an upstream partially deploys ROV or exports only valid routes to its neighbors, while an invalid forwarding path is maintained internally. Crucially, TORCH provides a fine-grained empirical char-acterization of whether and how traffic is steered towards invalid origins, allowing us to unveil the latent collateral damage that eludes control-plane observation. We present two case studies to illustrate their real-world impact and pinpoint the underlying causes. 

7.2.1 Case Study I: Same-length MOAS Prefixes. We investi-gate a persistent MOAS anomaly involving the prefix 2405: e100:c::/48, which exhibits an invalid reachability consis-tently exceeding 88%. This prefix is announced by both AS137085 (valid) and AS132116 (invalid). Manual inspec-tion suggests that both ASes are likely operated by the same organization, a relationship not identified by [ 12 ]. Despite TORCH: Characterizing Invalid Route Filtering via Tunnelled Observation 

being benign, this case provides a critical insight into how 

inconsistency between the control plane and the data plane can facilitate stealthy same-length prefix hijacking .

TORCH reveals that 67.9% of observed traffic is forwarded to the invalid origin via AS6453, a Tier-1 ISP. By analyzing RIB data from RouteViews [ 47 ], we find that both valid and invalid routes are widely propagated by AS6453: the valid route P𝑣 (AS6453 AS4755 AS137085 ) reaches the valid ori-gin via AS4755, while the invalid route P𝑖 (AS6453 AS9498 AS132116 ) traverses AS9498. Our traceroute results show that most collected traces align with these two routes: 89.1% of traffic is steered through AS9498, whereas only 10.5% is forwarded by AS4755. The remaining traffic (less than 0.5%) refers to missing hops or alternative routes. To understand the pervasive effect of this anomaly, we extend our analysis to 15 other measurable Tier-1 networks. We find that all of them, including 8 with nearly full ROV protection, have their traffic eventually steered along P𝑖 ,accounting for 96.5% of their transit traffic towards the prefix. However, 14 of them are observed to have only valid routes on the control plane. These findings indicate an occurrence of collateral damage. To corroborate this observation, we perform a closer examination of AS1299 (Arelion). Using its public looking glass [ 59 ], we confirm that a router in New York selects P𝑣 in its RIB, yet traceroute probes from the same router follow P𝑖 , which is consistent with our measurements. Our traceroute results enable us to quantify the influence of the collateral damage. In total, we identify 845 affected downstream networks of these Tier-1 ASes. Crucially, given that our observation is limited by the distribution of tunnel nodes, the actual scope is likely broader, potentially involving the entire customer cones of these Tier-1 providers. Nonethe-less, our findings are sufficient to demonstrate a substantial global impact, which underscores that the absence of ROV at a single pivotal Tier-1 AS can undermine the collective validation efforts of the entire Internet. In summary, this case exemplifies a stealthy hijacking of same-length prefixes on the real Internet and highlights its security implication: an ROV-enforcing AS remains vulnera-ble if its upstream provider maintains both valid and invalid routes; the internal routing policies of permissive upstreams may direct packets to an egress point leading to an invalid ori-gin, diminishing the effect of downstream ROV filtering . More importantly, it provides the first evidence that such collateral damage can affect a significant fraction of the Internet. 

7.2.2 Case Study II: More-specific Prefixes Covered by Valid Routes. In this case, we focus on the prefix 2a06:a000:1d0::/44, whose invalid reachability exceeds 46% during our measure-ment campaign. This prefix is originated by AS142594 (in-valid), while its parent prefix 2a06:a000::/32 is originated by AS58212 (valid). We identify AS16117 and AS18001 as two victims of col-lateral damage. Both ASes exhibit strong evidence of ROV filtering in TORCH and APNIC assessments, while their providers, AS12552 and AS8966 respectively, show inconsis-tent or weak filtering, suggesting a lack of ROV enforcement. Our analysis corroborates that local ROV efforts alone are insufficient to prevent collateral damage. Since we cannot directly access their routing tables, we infer their route selection by performing traceroute from their tunnel endpoints. In particular, we apply a differential probing strategy, by targeting an address within the invalid /44 prefix and another within the valid /32 parent prefix (excluding the /44 range). For AS16117, /44 probes traverse 

AS16117 AS12552 AS60800 AS142594 , whereas /32 probes follow AS16117 AS12552 AS31027 AS58212 . This implies that AS12552 serves as the transit provider for both prefixes. Using the NLNOG Looking Glass [ 46 ], we further verify that AS12552 accepts and propagates the invalid route. These observations provide strong evidence of collateral damage: for the /44 prefix, although AS16117 forwards traffic to its upstream expecting it to follow the valid covering /32 route, the acceptance and preference of the invalid /44 route by AS12552 diverts the traffic to the invalid origin. Similarly, for AS18001, we observe a nearly identical pattern of collateral damage. Probes for the invalid /44 prefix traverse AS18001 AS8966 AS60800 AS142594 , while those for the valid /32 covering prefix follow AS18001 AS8966 AS58212 .Through two case studies, we illustrate the severe implica-tions of collateral damage in the real Internet. In addition to existing defensive proposals [ 34 , 42 ], we recommend that net-work operators perform active probing towards potentially anomalous prefixes and employ our reachability inference technique to proactively assess data-plane exposure to in-valid origins. Once unauthorized reachability is identified, operators can take timely actions to mitigate its adverse effects. 

## 8 Discussion 

Limitations. Despite its effectiveness, TORCH is subject to two primary limitations. First, our analysis depends on the fidelity of prefix-to-AS and AS-to-organization mapping datasets [ 9 , 12 ]. Potential staleness and errors in these data sources may lead to minor attribution inaccuracies. Second, traceroute paths may be distorted by load balancing and routing dynamics. Previous studies [ 3 , 15 , 19 ] have discussed these challenges and proposed mitigation techniques to en-hance the accuracy of path reconstruction. 

Beyond Prior Work. A retrospective analysis reveals that the intuition behind our cross-plane reachability inference echoes ideas explored in an earlier study of network reacha-bility [ 37 ]. However, we make substantial progress in both Renrui Tian et al. 

inference scope and sophistication. Specifically, the method-ology in [ 37 ] is constrained by its conservative heuristics that only examine the last two hops for inference. In contrast, our approach employs a more aggressive strategy that considers all ASes that maintain a route to the prefix. Furthermore, we explicitly address reachability inference in complex routing scenarios (e.g., MOAS prefixes), enabling more elaborate and robust disambiguation. 

Generality and Extensibility. The cross-plane reacha-bility inference methodology proposed in this paper is inde-pendent of specific measurement infrastructures or network protocols. Although we instantiate TORCH using open 6in4 tunnel endpoints, the underlying inference logic is appli-cable to traceroute data derived from other measurement platforms, such as RIPE Atlas [ 51 ]. In addition, the method is protocol-agnostic and extends readily to IPv4. By running IPv4 traceroutes, the same analytical principles can be em-ployed to evaluate ROV status in IPv4. Furthermore, our approach offers network operators a data-plane diagnostic capability to promptly identify prefix hijacking by examining whether traffic is diverted to invalid origins. 

## 9 Conclusion 

In this paper, we presented TORCH , a measurement frame-work for characterizing invalid route filtering in IPv6. By leveraging 6in4 tunnel endpoints as distributed vantage points and employing a cross-plane inference technique, we con-ducted a systematic assessment of ROV protection in IPv6. Our measurements show that only about 27% of ASes achieve nearly full protection, while several permissive Tier-1 networks still transit traffic towards invalid origins, preserv-ing a substantial attack surface. Furthermore, we provide the first empirical evidence that collateral damage under same-length prefix filtering can affect a significant fraction of the global Internet. To mitigate these risks, we urge operators to implement proactive data-plane monitoring to detect such unintended reachability issues. Taken together, our findings expose critical security gaps and unintended adverse effects in current ROV deployments. These insights underscore an urgent imperative for acceler-ated RPKI adoption as well as more rigorous and coordinated filtering practices to secure the global BGP routing system. 

## References 

[1] Pablo Alvarez, Florin Oprea, and John Rula. 2017. Rate-limiting of IPv6 traceroutes is widespread: measurements and mitigations. (2017). [2] APNIC Labs. 2025. IPv6 Capable Rate by country. https://stats.labs. apnic.net/ipv6/. Accessed: 2026-01-04. [3] Brice Augustin, Xavier Cuvellier, Benjamin Orgogozo, Fabien Viger, Timur Friedman, Matthieu Latapy, Clémence Magnien, and Renata Teixeira. 2006. Avoiding traceroute anomalies with Paris traceroute. In 

Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Internet Measure-ment (Rio de Janeriro, Brazil) (IMC ’06) . Association for Computing Ma-chinery, New York, NY, USA, 153–158. doi:10.1145/1177080.1177100 [4] Michael Bailey, David Dittrich, Erin Kenneally, and Doug Maughan. 2012. The menlo report. IEEE Security & Privacy 10, 2 (2012), 71–75. [5] Shehar Bano, Philipp Richter, Mobin Javed, Srikanth Sundaresan, Zakir Durumeric, Steven J. Murdoch, Richard Mortier, and Vern Paxson. 2018. Scanning the Internet for Liveness. SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev. 

48, 2 (May 2018), 2–9. doi:10.1145/3213232.3213234 [6] Robert Beverly, Ramakrishnan Durairajan, David Plonka, and Justin P. Rohrer. 2018. In the IP of the Beholder: Strategies for Active IPv6 Topol-ogy Discovery. In Proceedings of the Internet Measurement Conference 2018 (Boston, MA, USA) (IMC ’18) . Association for Computing Ma-chinery, New York, NY, USA, 308–321. doi:10.1145/3278532.3278559 [7] Randy Bush, Olaf Maennel, Matthew Roughan, and Steve Uhlig. 2009. Internet optometry: assessing the broken glasses in inter-net reachability. In Proceedings of the 9th ACM SIGCOMM Confer-ence on Internet Measurement (Chicago, Illinois, USA) (IMC ’09) . As-sociation for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 242–253. doi:10.1145/1644893.1644923 [8] CAIDA. 2025. AS Rank. https://asrank.caida.org/. Accessed: 2025-11-17. [9] CAIDA. 2025. Routeviews Prefix to AS mappings Dataset for IPv4 and IPv6. https://www.caida.org/catalog/datasets/routeviews-prefix2as/ Accessed: 2025-11-17. [10] Ben Cartwright-Cox. 2018. Are BGPs security features working yet? https://blog.benjojo.co.uk/post/are-bgps-security-features-working-yet-rpki [11] Wenqi Chen, Zhiliang Wang, Dongqi Han, Chenxin Duan, Xia Yin, Jiahai Yang, and Xingang Shi. 2022. ROV-MI: Large-Scale, Accurate and Efficient Measurement of ROV Deployment. In NDSS .[12] Zhiyi Chen, Zachary S. Bischof, Cecilia Testart, and Alberto Dainotti. 2023. Improving the Inference of Sibling Autonomous Systems. In 

Passive and Active Measurement: 24th International Conference, PAM 2023, Virtual Event, March 21–23, 2023, Proceedings . Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 345–372. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-28486-1_15 [13] Shinyoung Cho, Romain Fontugne, Kenjiro Cho, Alberto Dainotti, and Phillipa Gill. 2019. BGP hijacking classification. In 2019 Network Traffic Measurement and Analysis Conference (TMA) . 25–32. doi:10. 23919/TMA.2019.8784511 [14] Cloudflare. 2020. Is BGP Safe Yet? https://isbgpsafeyet.com/. Accessed: 2025-11-17. [15] Italo Cunha, Renata Teixeira, Darryl Veitch, and Christophe Diot. 2011. Predicting and tracking internet path changes. SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev. 41, 4 (Aug. 2011), 122–133. doi:10.1145/2043164.2018451 [16] Elwyn B. Davies and János Mohácsi. 2007. Recommendations for Filtering ICMPv6 Messages in Firewalls. RFC 4890. doi:10.17487/ RFC4890 [17] Ben Du, Cecilia Testart, Romain Fontugne, Gautam Akiwate, Alex C. Snoeren, and kc claffy. 2022. Mind your MANRS: measuring the MANRS ecosystem. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Internet Measure-ment Conference (Nice, France) (IMC ’22) . Association for Comput-ing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 716–729. doi:10.1145/3517745. 3561419 [18] Facebook. 2025. IPv6 Total Adoption. https://www.facebook.com/ ipv6/?tab=ipv6_total_adoption. Accessed: 2026-01-04. [19] Elverton Fazzion, Giancarlo Teixeira, Darryl Veitch, Christophe Diot, Renata Teixeira, and Ítalo Cunha. 2025. RemapRoute: Local Remapping of Internet Path Changes. In Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Internet Mea-surement Conference (USA) (IMC ’25) . Association for Computing Ma-chinery, New York, NY, USA, 185–191. doi:10.1145/3730567.3732923 TORCH: Characterizing Invalid Route Filtering via Tunnelled Observation 

[20] Yossi Gilad, Avichai Cohen, Amir Herzberg, Michael Schapira, and Haya Shulman. 2016. Are we there yet? On RPKI’s deployment and security. Cryptology ePrint Archive (2016). [21] Robert E. Gilligan and Erik Nordmark. 2005. Basic Transition Mecha-nisms for IPv6 Hosts and Routers. RFC 4213. doi:10.17487/RFC4213 [22] Fernando Gont, Suresh Krishnan, Dr. Thomas Narten, and Richard P. Draves. 2021. Temporary Address Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in IPv6. RFC 8981. doi:10.17487/RFC8981 [23] Google. 2025. IPv6 Statistics. https://www.google.com/intl/en/ipv6/ statistics.html. Accessed: 2026-01-04. [24] Mehmet H. Gunes and Kamil Sarac. 2009. Analyzing Router Respon-siveness to Active Measurement Probes. In Passive and Active Network Measurement , Sue B. Moon, Renata Teixeira, and Steve Uhlig (Eds.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 23–32. [25] Jiaxing Guo, Lin He, Daguo Cheng, Xingang Shi, and Ying Liu. 2025. Bringing New Life to Old Tools: Measuring Source Address Valida-tion Deployment with 6in4 Tunnels. In 2025 IEEE/ACM 33rd Interna-tional Symposium on Quality of Service (IWQoS) . 1–10. doi:10.1109/ IWQoS65803.2025.11143432 [26] Mukesh Gupta and Alex Conta. 2006. Internet Control Message Proto-col (ICMPv6) for the Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6) Specification. RFC 4443. doi:10.17487/RFC4443 [27] Tomas Hlavacek, Amir Herzberg, Haya Shulman, and Michael Waidner. 2018. Practical Experience: Methodologies for Measuring Route Origin Validation. In 2018 48th Annual IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN) . 634–641. doi:10.1109/DSN. 2018.00070 [28] Tomas Hlavacek, Haya Shulman, Niklas Vogel, and Michael Waid-ner. 2023. Keep Your Friends Close, but Your Routeservers Closer: Insights into RPKI Validation in the Internet. In 32nd USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 23) . USENIX Association, Anaheim, CA, 4841–4858. https://www.usenix.org/conference/usenixsecurity23/ presentation/hlavacek [29] Hurricane Electric. 2026. Looking Glass for AS49544. https://bgp.he. net/lg/49544. Accessed: 2026-01-04. [30] Geoff Huston. 2021. Measuring ROAs and ROV. https://stats.labs. apnic.net/rpki [31] John Kristoff, Mohammad Ghasemisharif, Chris Kanich, and Jason Polakis. 2021. Plight at the End of the Tunnel: Legacy IPv6 Tran-sition Mechanisms in the Wild. In Passive and Active Measurement: 22nd International Conference, PAM 2021, Virtual Event, March 29 – April 1, 2021, Proceedings (Cottbus, Germany). Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 390–405. doi:10.1007/978-3-030-72582-2_23 [32] Mohit Lad, Ricardo Oliveira, Beichuan Zhang, and Lixia Zhang. 2007. Understanding Resiliency of Internet Topology Against Prefix Hijack Attacks. In Proceedings of the 37th IEEE/IFIP International Conference on Dependable Systems and Networks (DSN) . IEEE, 368–377. doi:10. 1109/DSN.2007.95 [33] Matt Lepinski and Stephen Kent. 2012. An Infrastructure to Support Secure Internet Routing. RFC 6480. doi:10.17487/RFC6480 [34] Weitong Li, Yuze Li, and Taejoong Chung. 2025. {ImpROV }: Mea-surement and Practical Mitigation of Collateral Damage in {RPKI }

Route Origin Validation. In 34th USENIX Security Symposium (USENIX Security 25) . 3631–3647. [35] Weitong Li, Zhexiao Lin, Md. Ishtiaq Ashiq, Emile Aben, Romain Fontugne, Amreesh Phokeer, and Taejoong Chung. 2023. RoVista: Measuring and Analyzing the Route Origin Validation (ROV) in RPKI. In Proceedings of the 2023 ACM on Internet Measurement Conference 

(Montreal QC, Canada) (IMC ’23) . Association for Computing Machin-ery, New York, NY, USA, 73–88. doi:10.1145/3618257.3624806 [36] Pat Litke and Joe Stewart. 2014. BGP Hijacking for Cryptocurrency Profit. Dell SecureWorks Counter Threat Unit Research Note. Avail-able at: https://www.secureworks.com/research/bgp-hijacking-for-cryptocurrency-profit. [37] Andra Lutu, Marcelo Bagnulo, Cristel Pelsser, and Olaf Maennel. 2014. Understanding the Reachability of IPv6 Limited Visibility Prefixes. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Passive and Ac-tive Measurement - Volume 8362 (Los Angeles, CA, USA) (PAM 2014) .Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 163–172. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-04918-2_16 [38] Di Ma, David Mandelberg, and Tim Bruijnzeels. 2018. Simplified Local Internet Number Resource Management with the RPKI (SLURM). RFC 8416. doi:10.17487/RFC8416 [39] Macarne. 2026. Looking Glass. https://lg.macarne.com/. Accessed: 2026-01-04. [40] Doug Madory. 2023. A Brief History of the Internet’s Biggest BGP Incidents. Kentik Blog. Available at: https://www.kentik.com/blog/a-brief-history-of-the-internets-biggest-bgp-incidents/. [41] MaxMind. 2025. GeoLite2 Free Geolocation Data. https://dev. maxmind.com/geoip/geolite2-free-geolocation-data Accessed: 2025-11-17. [42] Reynaldo Morillo, Justin Furuness, Cameron Morris, James Breslin, Amir Herzberg, and Bing Wang. 2021. ROV++: Improved Deployable Defense against BGP Hijacking.. In NDSS .[43] Dr. Thomas Narten, Richard P. Draves, and Suresh Krishnan. 2007. Privacy Extensions for Stateless Address Autoconfiguration in IPv6. RFC 4941. doi:10.17487/RFC4941 [44] Dr. Thomas Narten, Tatsuya Jinmei, and Dr. Susan Thomson. 2007. IPv6 Stateless Address Autoconfiguration. RFC 4862. doi:10.17487/ RFC4862 [45] NLnet Labs. 2025. Routinator. https://nlnetlabs.nl/projects/routing/ routinator/ [46] NLNOG. 2026. NLNOG Looking Glass. https://lg.ring.nlnog.net/. Accessed: 2026-01-04. [47] University of Oregon. 2025. University of Oregon RouteViews Project. https://www.routeviews.org/routeviews/ Accessed: 2025-11-17. [48] Louis Poinsignon. 2020. Is BGP Safe Yet? No. But we are tracking it carefully. https://blog.cloudflare.com/is-bgp-safe-yet-rpki-routing-security-initiative/. Cloudflare Blog. Accessed: 2026-01-05. [49] Andreas Reuter, Randy Bush, Italo Cunha, Ethan Katz-Bassett, Thomas C. Schmidt, and Matthias Wählisch. 2018. Towards a Rigorous Methodology for Measuring Adoption of RPKI Route Validation and Filtering. SIGCOMM Comput. Commun. Rev. 48, 1 (April 2018), 19–27. doi:10.1145/3211852.3211856 [50] RIPE NCC. 2008. YouTube Hijacking: A RIPE NCC RIS Case Study. RIPE NCC News. Available at: https://www.ripe.net/about-us/news/ youtube-hijacking-a-ripe-ncc-ris-case-study/. [51] RIPE NCC. 2025. RIPE Atlas. https://atlas.ripe.net/ Accessed: 2025-11-17. [52] Nils Rodday, Ítalo Cunha, Randy Bush, Ethan Katz-Bassett, Gabi D Rodosek, Thomas C Schmidt, and Matthias Wählisch. 2021. Revisiting rpki route origin validation on the data plane. In Proc. of Network Traffic Measurement and Analysis Conference (TMA), IFIP .[53] Brandon Schlinker, Kyriakos Zarifis, Italo Cunha, Nick Feamster, and Ethan Katz-Bassett. 2014. PEERING: An AS for Us. In Proceedings of the 13th ACM Workshop on Hot Topics in Networks (Los Angeles, CA, USA) (HotNets-XIII) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1–7. doi:10.1145/2670518.2673887 [54] Daniel Senie and Paul Ferguson. 2000. Network Ingress Filtering: Defeating Denial of Service Attacks which employ IP Source Address Spoofing. RFC 2827. doi:10.17487/RFC2827 Renrui Tian et al.                 

> [55] Pavlos Sermpezis, Vasileios Kotronis, Alberto Dainotti, and Xeno-fontas A. Dimitropoulos. 2018. A Survey among Network Operators on BGP Prefix Hijacking. ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review 48, 1 (2018), 64–69. doi:10.1145/3211852.3211862 [56] Aftab Siddiqui. 2018. What Happened? The Amazon Route 53 BGP Hijack to Take Over Ethereum Cryptocurrency Wallets. Internet Society Blog. Available at: https://www.internetsociety.org/blog/2018/ 04/amazons-route-53-bgp-hijack/. [57] Cecilia Testart, Philipp Richter, Alistair King, Alberto Dainotti, and David Clark. 2020. To Filter or not to Filter: Measuring the Benefits of Registering in the RPKI Today. In International Conference on Passive and Active Network Measurement . Springer, 71–87. [58] Renrui Tian, Yahui Li, Han Zhang, XinZhe Liu, Xia Yin, Xingang Shi, Zhiliang Wang, and Jilong Wang. 2025. Poster: ERIS: Evaluating ROV via ICMPv6 Rate Limiting Side Channels. In Proceedings of the 2025 ACM SIGSAC Conference on Computer and Communications Security
> (Taipei, Taiwan) (CCS ’25) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 4731–4733. doi:10.1145/3719027.3760707 [59] Twelve99. 2026. AS1299 Looking Glass. https://lg.twelve99.net/. Ac-cessed: 2026-01-04. [60] Maya Ziv, Liz Izhikevich, Kimberly Ruth, Katherine Izhikevich, and Zakir Durumeric. 2021. ASdb: a system for classifying owners of autonomous systems. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM Internet Measure-ment Conference (Virtual Event) (IMC ’21) . Association for Comput-ing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 703–719. doi:10.1145/3487552. 3487853

## Ethical Considerations 

To minimize potential impacts on network operations and third-party infrastructure, we designed and executed our measurements in accordance with [ 4 ]. Specifically, our prob-ing is strictly limited to low-rate traceroute packets and no other traffic is generated for any extraneous purposes. We enforce strict per-endpoint rate limiting to ensure negligible bandwidth consumption and avoid interfering with legiti-mate tunnel traffic. Beyond these probes, we strictly abstain from any operations that could facilitate infrastructure abuse, such as inducing amplification effects or probing internal network assets. To further reduce measurement load on any single network, we minimized probing overhead through sampling of vantage points and de-duplication of targets. We also restricted the maximum hop count of traceroutes and employed a round-robin scheduling strategy to prevent traffic bursts. Finally, to mitigate the security and privacy risks associated with infrastructure exposure, we anonymize all sensitive IP addresses in our datasets. This includes the public IPv4 interfaces of tunnel nodes and all non-public IPv6 addresses within the internal networks. 

## A Tunnel Geolocation and AS Attribution 

This section provides supplementary details regarding the geographic distribution of the discovered 6in4 tunnel end-points and the technical implementation of the heuristics used for IPv6 AS attribution. 

## A.1 Geographic Distribution 

Figure 10 illustrates the global distribution of the 1,048,273 identified tunnel endpoints based on their IPv4 addresses. While the footprint spans 115 countries, we observe partic-ularly dense clusters in China and Australia. Notable con-centrations are also present in Brazil, India, and the United States. 10 

> 100
> 1k
> 10k
> 100k
> # of tunnel endpoints

Figure 10: Global geographic distribution of the discov-ered 6in4 tunnel endpoints. 

## A.2 IPv6 Attribution 

We perform active measurements to infer and validate the IPv6 AS affiliation of tunnel endpoints. To this end, we first attempt to learn the IPv6 address directly using the method described in [ 25 ]. For every endpoint, we send an encapsu-lated ICMPv6 Echo Request with the inner hop limit set to 1. When the endpoint receives the packet, it decapsulates the outer IPv4 header and processes the inner IPv6 packet as usual. Because the hop limit is decremented to zero, the end-point will respond an ICMPv6 Time Exceeded message that exposes its IPv6 address. Using this technique, we obtain IPv6 addresses for 175,559 endpoints (17%), spanning 242 ASes. For the remaining endpoints, we employ two traceroute-based heuristics to verify whether the same AS provides their IPv4 and IPv6 connectivity. Both heuristics leverage the method described in Section 4.1 to initiate traceroute probes from the tunnel endpoints. 

Inter-AS tracing. First, we perform IPv6 traceroute from each tunnel endpoint towards stable targets in Tier-1 ASes, which we expect to reside outside the local network of the endpoint. By steering traffic towards well-connected providers, we force the path to traverse the network boundary. Conse-quently, the first responsive hop typically corresponds to the local gateway or the immediate upstream router. We then confirm the attribution if its IPv6 address maps to the same AS as the endpoint’s IPv4 address. 

Intra-AS tracing. If inter-AS tracing fails to yield a match-ing AS, we proceed to test whether the endpoint is topologi-cally adjacent to the native IPv6 infrastructure of its hosting TORCH: Characterizing Invalid Route Filtering via Tunnelled Observation 

IPv4 AS. To this end, we first identify the target IPv6 address space by extracting all IPv6 prefixes advertised by the end-point’s IPv4 ASN from global BGP RIBs [ 47 ]. Within each prefix, we construct potential active targets by appending common interface identifiers (e.g., ::1 , ::FFFF ). Because these targets represent destinations strictly internal to the hosting AS, traffic from a local endpoint should not egress to the public Internet but rather traverse the AS’s internal network fabric. We execute IPv6 traceroute to these targets, and if any router within the first two hops maps to the host-ing IPv4 ASN, we interpret this adjacency as confirmation of the AS affiliation. Finally, we are able to attribute 777,667 (74%) tunnel end-points to 1,349 IPv6 ASes. 

## B Reachability Dynamics 

During our measurement, several prefixes exhibited signifi-cant reachability dynamics, as shown in Figure 9. We inves-tigate the underlying causes behind these dynamics. 

## B.1 Case 1: Operational Gaps in ROV Implementation 

We observe a slight increase in the reachability of Cloud-flare’s RPKI beacon 2606:4700:7000::/48 on December 17, 2025, indicating that certain ASes accepted RPKI-invalid routes on this date. For instance, AS4538 (CERNET), which typically lacks a route to this prefix, unexpectedly obtained reachability by routing traffic to Cloudflare’s PoP at Equinix Hong Kong. However, public RIB snapshots [ 47 ] show no corresponding changes for this event, suggesting that such invalid route propagation can remain localized and thus evade public route collectors. Similarly, AS6939 (Hurricane Electric) exhibited pronounced reachability fluctuations. Continuous monitoring by TORCH 

reveals that AS6939 briefly regained access to the prefix on January 8 and 9, 2026. During this window, traceroute probes from AS4538 traversed AS23911 (CNGI-6IX) and then AS6939 before reaching Cloudflare’s ingress point at Equinix Zurich. This indicates that the invalid route was first ac-cepted by AS6939 and subsequently propagated downstream to AS23911 and AS4538. Simultaneously, RIB data [ 47 ] shows that AS6939 indeed propagated the invalid routes during the measurement window, thereby compromising the routing integrity of its downstream customer cone. Notably, our find-ings are further corroborated by APNIC measurements [ 30 ], which reported a significant drop in the ROV filtering ratio for AS6939 during the same period. Collectively, these reachability anomalies point to poten-tial implementation gaps or misconfigurations in the ROV deployment of the affected ASes. Moreover, our investiga-tion of the December 17 incident demonstrates that control-plane monitoring can overlook localized route changes due to limited visibility. This underscores the necessity of active data-plane measurements to fully capture routing dynamics. 

## B.2 Case 2: The Pivotal Role of Tier-1 ASes in Invalid Route Propagation 

Reachability variations observed for three RPKI-invalid pre-fixes correlate closely with the control-plane visibility of AS6762 (Telecom Italia Sparkle). Specifically, the prefixes 2406:d440:ffff::/48 and 2401:7660::/48—both originated by cus-tomer ASes of AS4837 (China Unicom) and propagated via its transit network—displayed recurrent visibility fluctuations across the observation window. A comparative analysis of routing data before and after reachability spikes shows that these anomalies stemmed from AS4837 exporting these in-valid customer routes to AS6762. Upon acceptance, AS6762 further propagated these routes to its extensive customer cone, thereby facilitating a surge in global reachability for both prefixes. In contrast, the prefix 2a06:a000:160::/44 underwent an abrupt reachability decline after December 23, 2025, coin-ciding with a sharp reduction in corresponding RIB entries. We note that two pivotal ASes, AS64289 and AS6762, were prevalent in the observed propagation paths prior to the de-cline—the route was propagated from AS64289 to AS6762—but disappeared thereafter [ 47 ]. Looking Glass queries at AS64289 [ 39 ]confirmed that the prefix remained in its local routing table, implying that the reachability drop was not caused by a loss of the route at AS64289 (e.g., due to an upstream withdrawal). Instead, it is more likely that AS6762 either filtered or failed to receive the announcement from AS64289. To distinguish between these possibilities, we queried the Looking Glass of AS49544 [ 29 ]—another peer of AS64289—and found a similar absence of the route in its routing table. This consistent ab-sence across both peers allows us to attribute the reachability decline with greater confidence to a change in AS64289’s export policy, rather than to localized filtering by AS6762. To summarize, these findings underscore the critical role of Tier-1 ASes in global route propagation. As the global visibility of a prefix hinges on the transit and export decisions of Tier-1 networks, the rigorous enforcement of ROV at this tier provides significant collateral benefits for Internet-wide routing security.