Title: AEGIS: Adversarial Entropy-Guided Immune System -- Thermodynamic State Space Models for Zero-Day Network Evasion Detection

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.02149v1

Published Time: Fri, 03 Apr 2026 01:05:35 GMT

Number of Pages: 10

Markdown Content:
# AEGIS: Adversarial Entropy-Guided Immune System 

# Thermodynamic State Space Models for Zero-Day Network Evasion Detection 

Vickson Ferrel 

Faculty of Computer Science & Information Technology Universiti Malaysia Sarawak (UNIMAS) , Kota Samarahan, Malaysia 

Founder & Lead Architect, Vixero Technology Enterprise , Kuching, Sarawak, Malaysia 106641@siswa.unimas.my | vickson@vixdev.cloud 

Abstract —As TLS 1.3 encryption increasingly limits the effec-tiveness of traditional Deep Packet Inspection (DPI), the security community has pivoted to Euclidean Transformer-based classi-fiers (e.g., ET-BERT) for encrypted traffic analysis. However, these content-reading models remain structurally vulnerable to byte-level adversarial morphing. Recent white-box pre-padding attacks have reduced ET-BERT accuracy to 25.68%, while cryptographic mimicry protocols like VLESS Reality routinely bypass certificate-based detection. To address this fundamental limitation, we introduce AEGIS: an Adversarial Entropy-Guided Immune System powered by a Thermodynamic Variance-Guided Hyperbolic Liquid State Space Model (TVD-HL-SSM). AEGIS does not compete in the Euclidean payload-reading domain; rather, it establishes a distinct paradigm by discarding payload bytes entirely in favor of 6-dimensional continuous-time flow physics. We project these temporal features into a non-Euclidean Poincar´ e manifold, naturally accommodating the exponential branching of botnet topologies while mitigating gradient explo-sion. Concurrently, Liquid Time-Constants measure microsecond Inter-Arrival Time (IAT) decay, and a Thermodynamic Variance Detector calculates sequence-wide Shannon Entropy to expose the mathematical anomalies inherent to automated Command and Control (C2) tunnels. By coupling a pure C++ eBPF network ingress Harvester with a zero-copy Shared Memory (IPC) bridge, AEGIS bypasses the Python Global Interpreter Lock (GIL). Leveraging a linear-time O(N ) Mamba-3 core compiled via TileLang, AEGIS processes 64,000-packet parallel swarms at line-rate without the memory bottlenecks character-istic of Transformers. Evaluated on a 400GB, 4-tier adversar-ial corpus—spanning trans-Pacific backbone traffic, IoT botnet captures, SHA256-verified zero-days, and proprietary VLESS Reality tunnels—AEGIS achieves a 0.9952 F1-score and a 99.50% True Positive Rate. Operating at a Swarm Batch Size of 64, the architecture establishes a theoretical computational ceiling of 40 Million Packets Per Second (Mpps) with a 1.6 ms aggregate inference latency on a consumer RTX 4090. AEGIS establishes a new state-of-the-art for non-Euclidean, physics-based adversarial network defense, while identifying the theoretical detection limits of flow-based physics against true human-mimicry protocols. 

Index Terms —Network Security, Encrypted Traffic Analysis, State Space Models, Hyperbolic Geometry, Deep Packet Inspec-tion, Adversarial Evasion. 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

The pervasive adoption of TLS 1.3 [1] has severely limited the capabilities of traditional Deep Packet Inspection (DPI). By encrypting payload data and the Server Name Indication (SNI), modern cryptographic protocols reduce the efficacy of legacy firewalls that rely on signature matching and plain-text analysis. In response, the cybersecurity community has increasingly adopted Deep Learning (DL) architectures to classify encrypted traffic. Specifically, Euclidean Transformer-based models—such as ET-BERT [2]—have emerged as a standard approach. These models leverage natural language processing (NLP) techniques to interpret packet byte se-quences, frequently achieving >99% accuracy on static, non-adversarial benchmarks [3]. However, recent literature indicates a structural vulnera-bility within this paradigm: content-reading classifiers are inherently sensitive when subjected to adversarial morphing. Because models like ET-BERT prioritize the sequential order of payload bytes (often anchoring to the initial 32 bytes of a packet), attackers can effectively bypass detection through sequence manipulation. Jing et al. [4] demonstrated that adversarial pre-padding techniques—injecting stochastic byte noise at the beginning of packets—can degrade ET-BERT’s classification accuracy to 25.68%. Furthermore, cryptographic mimicry tools, such as VLESS Reality [5], dynamically spoof legitimate TLS 1.3 WebSockets, reducing the reliability of certificate-based detection entirely. Compounding this limitation is the industry’s reliance on intent-based classification, where systems attempt to distin-guish between benign encrypted tunnels (e.g., commercial VPNs) and malicious obfuscation. We argue that relying on this distinction presents a critical security gap. Adversarial morphing frameworks, such as AMOI [6], have demonstrated the ability to synthetically generate padding that anchors malicious Command and Control (C2) tunnels to the vol-umetric center (the “Fat Middle”) of benign distributions. Consequently, distinguishing between benign and malicious obfuscation becomes highly challenging when the adversary actively controls the morphing algorithm. To maintain perime-ter defense, network systems must adopt a stringent zero-trust classification paradigm: continuous-flow proxies, XTLS Real-ity tunnels, and encrypted obfuscation tools must be classified as anomalies, terminating unauthorized tunnels regardless of their simulated intent. Moving beyond payload bytes to flow-level physics presents 

> arXiv:2604.02149v1 [cs.CR] 2 Apr 2026

distinct challenges. Prior work on the AMOI framework re-vealed the “Jitter Anomaly” [6], demonstrating that dynamic morphing driven by stateless surrogates inadvertently triggers temporal alerts in stateful firewalls. Furthermore, advanced white-box adversarial attacks, such as Ayaka AH-MSI [6], have achieved evasion rates exceeding 99.5% against standard continuous-time sequence models by effectively mimicking temporal distributions via Manifold Shattering. To address these vulnerabilities, this paper introduces AEGIS: an Adversarial Entropy-Guided Immune System pow-ered by a Thermodynamic Variance-Guided Hyperbolic Liq-uid State Space Model (TVD-HL-SSM). AEGIS operates in a distinct mathematical classification genre from Euclidean sequence models. Instead of processing susceptible payload bytes, AEGIS operates strictly on 6-dimensional flow physics. By projecting temporal features into a non-Euclidean Poincar´ emanifold [7], AEGIS mitigates gradient explosion while ac-commodating the exponential branching of botnet topologies. Concurrently, Liquid Time-Constants [8] measure microsec-ond Inter-Arrival Time (IAT) decay, and a Thermodynamic Variance Detector calculates sequence-wide Shannon Entropy to identify the structural variance inherent to automated C2 tunnels, rendering adversarial pre-padding [4] largely ineffec-tive. The main contributions of this study are summarized as follows:  

> •

The TVD-HL-SSM Architecture: We propose a neu-ral architecture fusing Hyperbolic Poincar´ e embeddings [7], Liquid Time-Constants [8], and a hardware-aware Mamba-3 core [9]. Compiled via TileLang JIT, this configuration allows line-rate processing of 1,000-packet causal windows without the GPU memory constraints typical of O(N 2) Transformers.  

> •

Thermodynamic Entropy Detection: To counter white-box manifold shattering, we introduce a Thermodynamic Variance Detector that calculates the Shannon Entropy of hidden states, identifying the unnatural variance of automated evasion tunnels.  

> •

Zero-Trust Adversarial Corpus: We construct a 400GB, 4-tier adversarial corpus encompassing trans-Pacific backbone traffic, IoT botnets, zero-day rootkits, and proprietary VLESS Reality captures to evaluate crypto-graphic obfuscation under strict zero-tolerance parame-ters.  

> •

Performance Validation under Adversarial Condi-tions: Evaluated on an RTX 4090 via bare-metal CUDA Graph optimization, AEGIS achieves an F1-score of 0.9952 and a 99.50% True Positive Rate against zero-day evasion at a sub-millisecond inference latency of 262.27 μs, establishing a state-of-the-art baseline for continuous-time thermodynamic traffic classification. II. B ACKGROUND AND THREAT MODEL 

To contextualize the architectural design of AEGIS, it is necessary to examine the evolution of encrypted traffic classification and formally define the adversarial capabilities that modern defense systems must withstand. 

A. Limitations of Current Deep Learning Paradigms 

Historically, Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) relied on static signatures and heuristic rule-sets. As TLS 1.3 [1] standard-ized payload and SNI encryption, research shifted toward Deep Learning (DL) approaches. Current state-of-the-art ar-chitectures largely utilize Euclidean Transformer models (e.g., ET-BERT [2]) or Convolutional Networks (e.g., NetConv). These models process network packets analogously to natural language tokens, extracting latent representations from byte sequences. While Euclidean DL models achieve high accuracy on standard benchmarks, recent adversarial evaluations indi-cate structural vulnerabilities. Jing et al. [4] demonstrated that Transformer-based classifiers exhibit severe sensitivity to Adversarial Pre-Padding. By prepending stochastic byte sequences, the classification accuracy of ET-BERT degrades significantly. These findings suggest that models reliant on payload byte sequences may lack real-world transferability when faced with adversaries capable of morphological pertur-bation. Furthermore, reliance on certificate structures leaves classifiers vulnerable to cryptographic mimicry, where tools like VLESS Reality [5] seamlessly adopt the cryptographic identity of benign domains. 

B. The Temporal and Non-Euclidean Gap 

Recognizing the limitations of payload-dependent clas-sifiers, research has explored temporal flow analysis. Continuous-time models, such as Liquid Time-Constant (LTC) networks [8], offer robust mechanisms for modeling Inter-Arrival Time (IAT). However, early evaluations of continuous-time sequence models revealed a distinct vulnerability to tem-poral adversarial attacks. Prior internal evaluations utilizing the AMOI framework [6] demonstrated that adversaries can anchor malicious traffic to the volumetric “Fat Middle” of benign distributions. More critically, white-box evaluations utilizing adversar-ial agents (e.g., Ayaka AH-MSI [6]) suggest that standard continuous-time models are susceptible to Manifold Shatter-ing . In these attacks, the adversary systematically aligns mali-cious temporal distributions with benign baselines, effectively bypassing standard Liquid State Space Models (SSMs). This identifies a clear, unresolved gap in the literature: How can a classification system maintain robust detection against an adversary capable of simultaneously morphing payload bytes, spoofing cryptographic identities, and optimizing temporal distributions? 

TABLE I: Comparison of Network Traffic Classification Paradigms             

> Architecture Feature Space Adv. Padding Temporal Morphing
> ET-BERT [2] Euclidean Bytes Vulnerable N/A Standard SSMs Euclidean Time Immune Vulnerable
> AEGIS (Proposed) Hyperbolic Physics Immune Resistant (Entropy)

C. Threat Model and Adversary Capabilities 

To ensure the generalizability and modern relevance of AEGIS, we formulate a comprehensive threat model that assumes a highly capable, intent-driven adversary. The ad-versary’s primary objective is to maintain a continuous, low-latency Command and Control (C2) or exfiltration tunnel across a monitored network boundary without triggering anomaly detection systems. We assume a Grey-Box to White-Box adversary with the following capabilities: 1) Content Manipulation: The adversary can arbitrar-ily manipulate the packet payload, including applying Adversarial Pre-Padding [4] and fluent byte injection, without corrupting the underlying application data. 2) Cryptographic Mimicry: The adversary possesses the capability to forge or borrow legitimate TLS 1.3 cer-tificates, utilizing protocols such as VLESS Reality to obscure Server Name Indications. 3) Volumetric and Temporal Morphing: The adversary can inject dummy packets to alter flow size distributions (Fat Middle anchoring) and manipulate Inter-Arrival Times (IAT) using intelligent evasion frameworks (e.g., AMOI) to mimic benign application behavior. 4) Zero-Day Protocol Deployment: The adversary may utilize previously unseen, memory-resident malware or custom C2 protocols that do not exist in historical training datasets. 

Defense Objective: In contrast to intent-based routing that attempts to discern the subjective purpose of an encrypted tunnel, AEGIS operates under a strict zero-trust paradigm. The objective is to identify the fundamental thermodynamic and geometrical anomalies inherent to automated tunnel-ing, thereby detecting Class-1 Anomalies (all continuous-flow proxies and obfuscation tools) regardless of the specific adversarial technique employed. III. T HE AEGIS A RCHITECTURE 

To address the vulnerabilities of payload-dependent and Euclidean-temporal models, we formulate the Adversarial Entropy-Guided Immune System (AEGIS). AEGIS operates on a Thermodynamic Variance-Guided Hyperbolic Liquid State Space Model (TVD-HL-SSM). This section details the mathematical formulations of its four core components. 

A. 6-Dimensional Flow Physics Extraction 

To render adversarial pre-padding [4] ineffective, AEGIS categorically omits payload byte extraction. Instead, raw net-work traffic is parsed at the Data Link and Transport layers to construct a continuous-time topological sequence. For a given flow F , we extract a sequence of 6-dimensional physics vectors xi ∈ R6:

xi = [ Si, ∆ti, D i, W i, F i, P i] (1) The features are mathematically formalized as follows:  

> •

Packet Volume ( Si): The absolute byte size of the i-th packet, capturing the fundamental bandwidth utilization curve of the cryptographic tunnel.  

> •

Inter-Arrival Time (∆ti): The precise temporal gap 

∆ti = Ti − Ti−1, measured at microsecond resolution. This feature serves as the primary thermodynamic indica-tor of automated routing, as automated proxy agents (e.g., Xray-core) struggle to perfectly mimic the stochastic variance of human-driven IAT distributions.  

> •

Directionality ( Di): A binary scalar Di ∈ {− 1, +1 }

denoting egress (+1) for private IP sources and ingress (-1) otherwise. This establishes causal flow asymmetry.  

> •

TCP Window Size ( Wi): The advertised receiver win-dow. Automated proxy swarms frequently exhibit static or cyclical window scaling artifacts that deviate from benign OS-level TCP congestion control algorithms (e.g., CUBIC or BBR).  

> •

TCP Flags (Fi): The stateful protocol metadata (SYN, ACK, PSH, FIN), normalized as Fi =

flags value /255 .0 ∈ [0 , 1] , encoding the raw flag byte as a continuous scalar to capture connection-state anomalies.  

> •

Payload Ratio ( Pi): The ratio of payload bytes to total frame size, directly tracking the morphological overhead of adversarial padding injection [4]. A causal window of N = 1000 packets constitutes a single inference tensor X ∈ R1000 ×6. Prior to projection into the non-Euclidean manifold, the continuous temporal features (Si, ∆ti, W i) are strictly normalized using a log-scaled Z-score transformation to prevent numerical overflow in the Hyperbolic space: 

ˆx = log( x + 1) − μlog 

σlog + ϵ (2) where μlog and σlog are computed over the training corpus, and ϵ = 10 −5 ensures numerical stability. 

B. Hyperbolic Poincar´ e Embeddings 

Botnet topologies and obfuscated routing protocols inher-ently exhibit hierarchical, exponential branching structures. Embedding these structures in Euclidean space often leads to structural distortion and gradient instability. To mitigate this, AEGIS projects the Euclidean input sequence xi into a non-Euclidean Poincar´ e disk manifold Dn. The projection is defined as: 

ϕ(xi) = Wpxi

1 + || Wpxi|| + ϵ (3) where Wp ∈ Rn×6 represents learnable projection weights, and ϵ = 10 −5 prevents boundary singularities. The distance between two points u, v ∈ Dn is then calcu-lated using the isometric invariant Riemannian metric [7]: 

dc(u, v ) = arcosh 



1 + 2 || u − v|| 2

(1 − || u|| 2)(1 − || v|| 2)



(4) This hyperbolic projection preserves the complex topological geometry of adversarial flows without triggering the numerical instabilities common in Euclidean representations of hierarchi-cal data. C. Liquid Time-Constants for IAT Modeling 

Standard sequence models process inputs at discrete, uni-form intervals, stripping away the variance of network jitter. To capture the true thermodynamics of the network, AEGIS employs Liquid Time-Constant (LTC) networks [8]. The hidden state h(t) of the network is governed by a continuous-time ordinary differential equation (ODE): 

dh (t)

dt = − h(t)

τ (∆ ti) + f (h(t), x (t), t, θ ) (5) Crucially, the time-constant τ is parameterized as a function of the IAT ( ∆ti): 

τ (∆ ti) = softplus (τθ ) · exp( −∆ti/τ θ ) + ϵ (6) where τθ ∈ Rdmodel are learnable parameters. This formulation allows the neural state to decay proportionally to inter-packet timing gaps, capturing the structural variance of automated morphing tools that stateless surrogates cannot synthesize. 

D. Linear-Time Selective State Spaces (SSM) 

Analyzing 1,000-packet sequences via Transformer self-attention requires O(N 2) time and memory complexity. AEGIS replaces self-attention with a Mamba-based Selective State Space Model [10]. The continuous-time dynamics are discretized using a zero-order hold (ZOH) with a learnable step size ∆:

¯A = exp(∆ A), ¯B = (∆ A)−1(exp(∆ A) − I) · ∆B (7) This allows the model to process sequences as a linear recurrence: 

hk = ¯Ah k−1 + ¯Bx k, yk = Ch k (8) The resulting O(N ) computational complexity enables AEGIS to process massive causal windows at a sub-millisecond la-tency. 

E. Thermodynamic Variance Detection 

Algorithm 1 Thermodynamic Variance Detection (TVD) 

Require: Causal window X ∈ RN ×6, Baseline Entropy 

E[Hbenign ] 

> 1:

Extract hidden states h1, h 2, ..., h N from SSM core  

> 2:

for i = 1 to N do  

> 3:

Compute softmax: P (xi) ← exp( hi)   

> PNj=1 exp( hj)
> 4:

end for  

> 5:

Calculate Shannon Entropy: H(X) ←− PNi=1 P (xi) log 2 P (xi) 

> 6:

if H(X) < E[Hbenign ] − τthreshold then  

> 7:

Flag: Thermodynamic Variance Anomaly (Class-1)  

> 8:

else  

> 9:

Flag: Natural Stochastic Variance (Benign)  

> 10:

end if  

> 11:

return Classification Logit The final architectural component addresses advanced white-box attacks, such as the proprietary Ayaka AH-MSI framework [6], which achieve evasion through Manifold Shattering. While liquid state spaces map temporal logic, adversaries can optimize perturbations to align with benign volumetric distributions. To counter this, AEGIS implements a Thermodynamic Vari-ance Detector. The detector computes the Shannon Entropy 

H(X) of the hidden states across the sequence window. P (xi)

denotes the normalized softmax probability of the i-th hidden state activation hi ∈ Rdmodel , computed as: 

P (xi) = exp( hi)

PNj=1 exp( hj ) (9) The sequence-wide entropy is then derived: 

H(X) = −

> n

X

> i=1

P (xi) log 2 P (xi) (10) Benign traffic exhibits natural, stochastic entropy. Conversely, automated zero-day exfiltration generates rigid structural pat-terns that manifest as thermodynamic variance anomalies. This penalty is incorporated as an auxiliary training signal: 

Lthermo = λ · E[H(Xbenign )] − H(X) (11) where λ = 0 .1 and the expectation is computed over the benign traffic prior. This renders volumetric anchoring math-ematically distinguishable from genuine traffic. 

F. Zero-Copy IPC and eBPF Kernel Bypass 

A fundamental limitation of deploying Deep Learning mod-els for real-time Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) is the latency introduced by user-space context switching and the Python Global Interpreter Lock (GIL). To achieve true line-rate in-ference, AEGIS completely decouples network ingestion from neural execution. We implement a split-brain architecture. A pure C++ Har-vester utilizes Extended Berkeley Packet Filter (eBPF) via 

libbpf to intercept traffic directly at the network interface card (NIC) using eXpress Data Path (XDP). The eBPF Sentry extracts the 6-dimensional physics vector xi and executes Direct Memory Access (DMA) into a pre-allocated physical RAM block ( /dev/shm ). Concurrently, the PyTorch Executioner maps this physical memory block directly into a contiguous tensor utilizing 

torch.frombuffer() , achieving true zero-copy Inter-Process Communication (IPC). Communication between the binaries is governed by a microscopic hardware semaphore. This architecture allows the C++ Harvester to ingest millions of packets per second while the Python Mamba-3 core asyn-chronously evaluates 64,000-packet batches across the PCIe bus, entirely masking the I/O bottleneck. IV. E XPERIMENTAL SETUP AND DATASETS 

To rigorously evaluate AEGIS against both historical and zero-day evasion techniques, we established a comprehensive evaluation framework. This section details the corpus compo-sition, hyperparameter constraints, and the training protocol. A. The Zero-Trust Adversarial Corpus 

A primary limitation of prior network classification studies is the reliance on sanitized, non-adversarial datasets, which fail to represent modern evasion protocols. To ensure gen-eralizability, we curated a 400GB, 4-tier adversarial corpus totaling 908,037 unique 1,000-packet sequences. The dataset is explicitly categorized under a zero-trust paradigm, where all obfuscated tunnels are labeled as malicious anomalies. 

Data Leakage and Reproducibility Disclosure: We explic-itly note that elements of standard benchmarks (e.g., USTC-TFC2016 [17]) are present within Tier III of our training corpus. Consequently, direct benchmark comparison against legacy models like ET-BERT on USTC-TFC2016 is inten-tionally omitted to prevent evaluation bias. Performance is instead reported exclusively on the held-out test partition of the full adversarial corpus, emphasizing AEGIS’s capacity within its specific topological domain rather than attempting a direct payload-based comparison. Furthermore, because Tier IV captures are maintained as a closed research dataset, exact replication of the final F1-score is restricted. However, the architectural pipeline and Tiers I-III are made available to validate the baseline mathematical claims of the model. 

B. Hyperparameter Sensitivity and Loss Optimization 

The structural causal window N was empirically set to 1,000 packets. Preliminary ablation testing revealed that nar-row sequence windows ( N ≤ 200 ) failed to capture the macro-scopic entropy variance of automated C2 beacons, whereas expansive windows ( N ≥ 5000 ) introduced unacceptable buffering latency for real-time inference. To address the inherent difficulty of classifying adversarial boundary cases (e.g., AMOI morphing), AEGIS was optimized using Focal Loss [18]: 

F L (pt) = −α(1 − pt)γ log( pt) (12) Following Lin et al. [18], hyperparameters γ = 2 .0 and α =0.75 were selected to optimally down-weight easy examples (such as overt plaintext botnets) and force the model to pe-nalize subtle, cryptographically disguised evasion traffic. Fur-thermore, the thermodynamic variance threshold ( τthreshold )outlined in Algorithm 1 required strict empirical tuning. The baseline natural entropy, E[Hbenign ], was established by calculating the average sequence-wide Shannon Entropy across the Tier I planetary baseline captures (MAWI and CIC-IDS-2017). Setting τthreshold too conservatively ( τ < 0.05 )resulted in unacceptable alert fatigue, misclassifying normal network jitter as adversarial anomalies. Conversely, setting the threshold too aggressively ( τ > 0.20 ) permitted highly sophisticated, low-volume AMOI morphing agents to evade detection. Consequently, τthreshold was dynamically calibrated to 0.12, establishing an optimal mathematical equilibrium between sensitivity to manifold shattering and tolerance for natural benign rigidity. 

C. Training Protocol and Hardware Profiling 

Of the total 908,037 sequences, the dataset was subjected to a rigorous 80/20 train/test split. Data stratification was enforced to ensure proportional representation of all four threat tiers within both subsets. To prevent bias toward the majority class during training, a WeightedRandomSampler was employed to oversample the minority malicious class, achiev-ing an approximate 54/46 benign-to-malicious batch ratio. The model was trained using the AdamW optimizer [19] with a batch size of 256. To address the gradient scaling is-sues inherent to Hyperbolic manifolds—specifically, numerical overflow as embedded vectors approach the boundary of the Poincar´ e disk ( || x|| ≈ 1)—we utilized NVIDIA’s Mixed Preci-sion (FP16) framework [20] combined with a GradScaler .This implementation allowed the architecture to dynamically isolate and discard corrupted batches containing NaN losses, ensuring stable model convergence while maximizing Tensor Core utilization on the RTX 4090. V. R ESULTS AND EVALUATION 

AEGIS was evaluated against the held-out test partition of the complete 4-tier adversarial corpus. Because all four data tiers were aggregated prior to the 80/20 train/test split, the held-out partition inherently contained a randomized, stratified 20% representation of all threat vectors, including zero-day rootkits and proprietary cryptographic evasion protocols (e.g., VLESS Reality, GhostBear). The primary objective was to assess the architecture’s aggregate capacity to detect heavily obfuscated tunneling while maintaining sub-millisecond infer-ence latency. 

A. Classification Performance and Convergence 

The TVD-HL-SSM architecture demonstrated stable con-vergence. Training utilized early stopping based on validation metrics, with the optimal checkpoint selected at Epoch 10, achieving a validation loss of 0.0052. Continued training beyond Epoch 10 produced marginal degradation, suggesting optimal convergence and mitigating overfitting on the training partition. At the Epoch 10 checkpoint, AEGIS achieved an overall F1-score of 0.9952, demonstrating strong and consistent detection capabilities across the aggregated adversarial spectrum. Critically, AEGIS achieved a True Positive Rate (TPR) of 99.50%, correctly identifying 57,551 of the 57,838 anomalous sequences present in the held-out test set. This recall rate indicates that the Mamba-3 selective state space effectively isolates the thermodynamic signatures of advanced evasion tools, despite their cryptographic resemblance to benign en-terprise traffic. As documented by Jing et al. [4], standard Euclidean models (e.g., ET-BERT) typically experience severe accuracy degradation—dropping to 25.68%—when encounter-ing adversarial morphing. By discarding payload bytes in favor of continuous-time flow physics, AEGIS maintains high recall under equivalent adversarial conditions. The False Positive Rate (FPR) stabilized at 0.2141%, rep-resenting only 265 misclassified benign sequences out of TABLE II: Composition of the 400GB Zero-Trust Adversarial Corpus                        

> Tier Source Datasets / Protocols Class Sequences ( N= 1000 )Thermodynamic Profile
> Tier I: Planetary Baselines WIDE MAWI [11], CIC-IDS-2017 [12], DoHBrw Benign (0) 618,145 High stochastic variance, natural TCP congestion Tier II: Automated Swarm IoT-23 [13] (Mirai, Torii), CTU-13 [14] Malicious (1) 112,400 Highly rigid IAT, automated sequence timing profiles Tier III: Zero-Day Vault MTA [15], BCCC-Mal-NetMem [16] Malicious (1) 94,350 Memory-resident rootkits and high-variance C2 beacons Tier IV: Cryptographic Evasion VLESS Reality, GhostBear, AMOI Morphing Malicious (1) 83,142 Forced volumetric anchoring, manifold shattering
> Total Evaluated Sequences: 908,037 Extracted from 400GB PCAPs (10GB 6D Tensors)

123,770. In the context of enterprise security, an FPR below 0.25% substantially mitigates the alert-fatigue endemic to legacy Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) deployments, enabling high-confidence autonomous termination of anomalous tunnels without operator intervention. 

False Positive Error Analysis: While an FPR of 0.2141% represents a substantial reduction relative to payload-dependent baselines, a forensic analysis of the 265 misclassi-fied benign sequences reveals distinct topological edge cases. TABLE III: AEGIS Performance on Held-Out Adversarial Corpus (Epoch 10 Checkpoint) 

Metric Score 

True Positive Rate (TPR) 99.50% False Positive Rate (FPR) 0.2141% F1-Score 0.9952 Inference Latency 262.27 μsValidation Loss 0.0052 

B. Thermodynamic Variance Analysis 

The sustained TPR across the aggregated adversarial test set provides empirical support for the efficacy of the Ther-modynamic Variance Detector (TVD). While adversaries can successfully spoof cryptographic certificates and anchor packet volumes to benign distributions, the underlying morphing algorithms remain fundamentally deterministic. This determin-ism generates structural rigidity across the 1,000-packet causal window. The TVD measures this lack of natural stochastic entropy as a variance anomaly within the hyperbolic latent space. These findings suggest that AEGIS identifies continuous-time proxies not by their byte sequences or volumetric intent, but by the mathematical properties of their evasion logic, allowing it to detect heavily obfuscated Tier IV protocols that often bypass standard sequence models. 

C. Feature Robustness and the Temporal Anomaly 

To evaluate the resilience of the 6-dimensional physics vector against dimensional collapse, an unintended hard-ware anomaly was analyzed during high-speed bare-metal benchmarking. When injecting the UDP DDoS dataset via 

tcpreplay directly into the lo (loopback) interface, the eBPF Sentry’s execution speed eclipsed the packet generation rate, resulting in recorded Inter-Arrival Times (IAT) of strictly 

0.0000 μs across continuous 1,000-packet causal windows. This hardware-induced temporal collapse effectively blinded the Liquid Time-Constant (LTC) mechanism, neutralizing the primary temporal feature ( ∆ti). However, inference telemetry revealed that the TVD-HL-SSM architecture did not expe-rience catastrophic failure. Instead, the model sustained an anomalous threat confidence interval of ≈65.0% (Max Logit: 0.6484). This empirical anomaly demonstrates non-linear dimen-sional robustness within the Hyperbolic Poincar´ e manifold. Even with the total loss of temporal context, the Mamba-3 core successfully cross-referenced the remaining 5 spatial dimen-sions (TCP Window, Flags, Payload Ratio, Size, Direction) to identify the structural morphology of the DDoS swarm. This confirms that AEGIS does not rely on a single point of failure (e.g., timing variance alone), ensuring sustained threat detection even if an adversary successfully applies perfect temporal obfuscation (Manifold Shattering) to the IAT dimension. 

D. Inference Latency and the Hardware Bottleneck 

A primary limitation of Transformer-based models in net-work security is their O(N 2) computational complexity, which introduces prohibitive bottlenecks in environments requiring high-throughput inspection. By utilizing a linear-time O(N )

Selective State Space (Mamba) core coupled with the Zero-Copy IPC bridge, AEGIS achieves highly efficient scaling for long-sequence modeling. Inference benchmarking was conducted on an NVIDIA RTX 4090 (24GB GDDR6X, CUDA 13.0) using BFloat16 mixed precision and torch.cuda.CUDAGraphs to elim-inate CPU dispatch overhead. To evaluate computational throughput limits, AEGIS was benchmarked using a 14GB UDP DDoS dataset replayed via tcpreplay on an isolated loopback interface. Operating at a Swarm Batch Size of 64 (64,000 continuous packets), the Zero-Copy IPC bridge facilitated an aggregate inference latency of 1.6 ms per batch (effectively 25 μsper 1,000-packet sequence). This establishes a theoretical computational ceiling of 40 Million Packets Per Second (Mpps), heavily outperforming traditional Python-bound in-gestion pipelines. However, empirical stress testing at Batch 256 (simulating 128+ Mpps throughput) revealed a hard hardware limit in cloud environments. Latency spiked non-linearly to 7.1 ms. This degradation was entirely localized to the virtualized PCIe Gen 4 bus attempting to transfer 5.86 MB of shared memory per strike. This confirms that while the AEGIS computational engine scales efficiently to 100 Gbps line-rates, physical deployment requires bare-metal hardware utilizing NVIDIA GPUDirect RDMA and ConnectX-7 SmartNICs to bypass System RAM entirely and avoid the I/O transfer bottleneck. Benign (0) Malicious (1)   

> Predicted Label
> Benign (0) Malicious (1)
> Actual Label  123505 265
> 287 57551
> AEGIS Confusion Matrix
> (Epoch 10 Validation)

(a) Confusion Matrix 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0  

> False Positive Rate
> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> True Positive Rate
> AEGIS ROC Curve
> AEGIS TVD-HL-SSM V3
> (AUC = 0.9998)

(b) Empirical ROC Curve Baseline 5% Noise 10% Noise 15% Noise    

> 0.0
> 0.2
> 0.4
> 0.6
> 0.8
> 1.0
> F1-Score
> 0.9952 0.9913 0.9753
> 0.5939
> Manifold Shattering Threshold
> (Adversarial Stress Test)

(c) Adversarial Robustness 

Fig. 1: AEGIS V3 Evaluation Suite: (a) Confusion Matrix at Epoch 10 showing a 0.21% FPR; (b) Empirical ROC demonstrating a 0.9998 AUC; (c) Adversarial Gauntlet proving topological resilience up to the 15% Gaussian noise shattering threshold. 

E. Architectural Ablation: Mamba-1 vs. Mamba-3 

To justify the architectural transition to the Mamba-3 core [9], we conducted a direct ablation study against the baseline Mamba-1 formulation. The prior AEGIS architecture utilizing Mamba-1 achieved an F1-score of 0.9604 and an FPR of 2.31% at 0.55 ms inference latency. By integrating the Mamba-3 Multiple-Input Multiple-Output (MIMO) kernels compiled via TileLang JIT, AEGIS V3 improves the F1-score to 0.9952, reduces the FPR by an order of magnitude to 0.2141%, and reduces inference latency to 262.27 μs — a 2.1 × improvement. These results demonstrate that the hardware-aware MIMO state spaces of Mamba-3 provide empirically superior isola-tion of continuous-time thermodynamic variance across the aggregated adversarial spectrum. 

F. Adversarial Stress Testing: The Manifold Shattering Threshold 

To empirically validate the resilience of the Hyperbolic Poincar´ e embeddings against active temporal perturbation, we subjected the trained model to a Gaussian noise injection stress test. Adversaries may attempt to evade continuous-time models by artificially injecting stochastic microsecond jitter into their IAT distributions. At a 5% Gaussian noise injection, AEGIS maintained an F1-score of 0.9913. At 10% noise, the F1-score held at 0.9753, demonstrating that the non-Euclidean manifold naturally ab-sorbs moderate temporal perturbation attempts. However, at a 15% Gaussian noise threshold, the F1-score degraded to 0.5939, establishing the structural limit of the model’s topo-logical resilience. This explicitly maps the boundary at which continuous-time flow physics fail under overwhelming syn-thetic variance. Notably, physical adversaries cannot sustain 15% IAT noise injection without corrupting the integrity of their own C2 channel, rendering this threshold practically unachievable in operational deployments. 

G. The Human Entropy Horizon: Evasion Dynamics of VLESS Reality 

While AEGIS successfully classified rigid mechanical ob-fuscators (e.g., GhostBear, ProtonVPN) at 100% detection accuracy during unseen live-capture evaluation, forensic anal-ysis of the false negative anomalies revealed a fundamen-tal theoretical limit in flow-based detection. Cryptographic mimicry protocols such as VLESS Reality yielded a detection rate of 1.17% strictly when multiplexing true human entropy 

(e.g., a human actively browsing web applications). Because XTLS wrappers impart near-zero mechanical overhead, the temporal physics of the tunnel remain entirely stochastic. Con-sequently, AEGIS correctly categorizes the thermodynamic signature as benign, demonstrating that continuous-time flow physics cannot distinguish between a direct human connection and a perfectly mimicked human proxy. This result implies that adversaries must abandon automated, high-throughput C2 scripts—which AEGIS flags immediately— and operate at restrictive human interaction speeds, fundamentally constrain-ing the operational utility of VLESS Reality as a high-speed exfiltration channel. 

H. Feasibility of Enterprise Deployment 

While theoretical detection rates are critical, the practical deployment of deep learning models in operational network environments often fails due to integration friction. Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) engines typically operate at the kernel level to intercept high-speed traffic, whereas Python-based neural networks introduce severe user-space context-switching delays. To ensure AEGIS is viable for real-world perimeter defense, the architecture is designed to interface with modern packet processing frameworks like eBPF (Extended Berkeley Packet Filter) or DPDK (Data Plane Development Kit). In an op-erational deployment, a lightweight eBPF probe extracts the 6-dimensional physics vector xi = [ Si, ∆ti, D i, W i, F i, P i]

directly within the Linux kernel. This array is then asyn-chronously streamed to the GPU-accelerated AEGIS inference engine via zero-copy shared memory rings (e.g., AF XDP). Because AEGIS evaluates traffic exclusively on flow physics rather than deeply inspecting decrypted payload buffers, it avoids the cryptographic overhead associated with TLS inter-ception proxies (Middleboxes). If the Thermodynamic Vari-ance Detector (TVD) flags a sequence-wide entropy anomaly, the inference engine issues a highly confident Class-1 alert, allowing the Software-Defined Network (SDN) controller to immediately terminate the C2 routing tunnel. This decoupled, physics-only pipeline ensures that AEGIS can be deployed in privacy-preserving, high-throughput enterprise environments without violating TLS 1.3 encryption constraints. VI. R ELATED WORK 

The architectural design of AEGIS is directly informed by the critical limitations observed in recent cryptographic classification and temporal modeling literature. 

A. Euclidean Packet Classification 

The prevailing paradigm in encrypted traffic analysis re-lies on Euclidean representations of payload sequences. Ar-chitectures such as ET-BERT [2] and YaTC leverage pre-trained Transformer models to extract latent semantic struc-tures from packet bytes, treating network traffic analogous to natural language. While these models report high accuracy on benchmark datasets (e.g., ISCXVPN2016), recent studies indicate critical structural fragility. Jing et al. [4] demonstrated that Transformer-based classifiers exhibit severe sensitivity to Adversarial Pre-Padding, wherein stochastic byte injection reduces ET-BERT classification accuracy to 25.68%. AEGIS bypasses this vulnerability entirely by discarding payload bytes in favor of topological flow physics. 

B. Adversarial Traffic Generation 

The evolution of circumvention protocols has shifted from simple cryptographic obfuscation (e.g., standard TLS tunnels) to active statistical mimicry. Frameworks such as AMOI [6] and commercial proxy tools like VLESS Reality dynamically spoof legitimate WebSockets and anchor packet volumes to benign distributions. These tools successfully bypass intent-based Deep Packet Inspection (DPI) by exploiting the over-lapping statistical boundaries of benign and malicious proxies. AEGIS counters this by adopting a strict zero-trust operational model, classifying all obfuscated continuous-time proxies as topological anomalies regardless of their simulated volumetric intent. 

C. Botnet and IoT Modeling 

To accurately model the continuous-time dynamics of au-tomated swarms, robust hardware-level captures are required. The Aposemat IoT-23 dataset [13] and the CTU-13 dataset [14] provide the primary training ground truth for our au-tomated swarm modeling. Concurrently, the comprehensively labeled Bot-IoT dataset [21], [22], [23], [24], [25], [26] es-tablishes the broader literature context for IoT network foren-sics, guiding the architectural design of our continuous-time extraction without acting as the primary training corpus. By capturing authentic network behavior, this collective literature enabled AEGIS to isolate the fundamental thermodynamic rigidity inherent to automated Command and Control (C2) beaconing. 

D. Limitations of Existing Benchmarks 

A critical gap in existing literature is the absence of adver-sarial evaluation benchmarks. Public datasets such as USTC-TFC2016 [17] and ISCXVPN2016 contain benign application traffic and known malware signatures but lack adversarially-morphed evasion traffic. Consequently, high accuracy on these benchmarks does not generalize to real-world adversarial conditions, as demonstrated by ET-BERT’s degradation under AdvTraffic [4]. The AEGIS evaluation corpus addresses this gap directly by integrating proprietary cryptographic evasion protocols. 

E. Non-Euclidean and Thermodynamic Models 

To address the temporal dynamics of network traffic, re-search has increasingly explored continuous-time neural net-works. Liquid Time-Constant (LTC) networks [8] provide robust mechanisms for modeling physical time gaps (IAT) through dynamic ODEs. However, continuous-time models operating in Euclidean space remain vulnerable to white-box Manifold Shattering [6], where adversaries optimize evasion timing to mimic benign statistical decay. AEGIS addresses this by projecting temporal features into a Hyperbolic Poincar´ emanifold [7], which naturally accommodates the exponential branching of botnet routing, while simultaneously employing a Thermodynamic Variance Detector to identify the unnatu-ral rigidity of automated evasion logic. This thermodynamic approach builds upon the broader theoretical foundations of topological data analysis [27], non-Euclidean representation learning [28], [29], and continuous-time ordinary differential equations (ODEs) in sequence modeling [30], [31], [32], bridging the gap between theoretical manifold physics and applied network security [33], [34], [35], [36]. VII. C ONCLUSION 

As adversarial circumvention tools evolve from static cryp-tographic obfuscation to dynamic statistical mimicry, legacy Deep Packet Inspection and Euclidean Transformer models are facing inherent structural limitations. Relying on payload bytes or intent-based classification creates a structural vulnerability that attackers can reliably exploit through adversarial padding and manifold shattering. In this paper, we introduced AEGIS, a Thermodynamic Variance-Guided Hyperbolic Liquid State Space Model (TVD-HL-SSM) designed to establish a zero-trust perimeter defense. By explicitly abandoning the Euclidean payload-reading do-main and mapping 6-dimensional flow physics into a non-Euclidean Poincar´ e manifold, AEGIS neutralizes byte-level morphing. The integration of Liquid Time-Constants and a Thermodynamic Variance Detector identifies the deterministic rigidity of automated evasion tools, rendering volumetric and temporal spoofing mathematically distinguishable from natural human traffic. Evaluated on a 400GB adversarial corpus encompassing zero-day rootkits and proprietary VLESS Reality captures, AEGIS achieved an F1-score of 0.9952 and a 99.50% True Positive Rate. By decoupling ingestion via a C++ Zero-Copy IPC bridge, the O(N ) Mamba-3 core processes parallel swarms at a 1.6 ms aggregate latency, demonstrating that advanced physics-based detection can operate efficiently at 40 Mpps enterprise line-rates on consumer silicon. While we identify a theoretical “Human Entropy Horizon” wherein XTLS protocols multiplexing true human stochastic vari-ance approach the fundamental limit of flow-based detection, AEGIS effectively eliminates automated, high-throughput ad-versarial tunneling. AEGIS demonstrates that the future of resilient network defense lies not in reading bytes, but in measuring the fundamental thermodynamics of adversarial evasion. ETHICAL CONSIDERATIONS 

The development and empirical evaluation of AEGIS re-quired processing live, real-world network traffic alongside ac-tive malware captures. To ensure rigorous ethical compliance and mitigate the risk of unintended harm, all Tier III and Tier IV adversarial evaluations—including the detonation of zero-day rootkits and the execution of VLESS Reality morphing protocols—were strictly confined to an isolated, air-gapped laboratory environment. Live Command and Control (C2) communications were sinkholed to prevent any interaction with malicious external infrastructure. Furthermore, for the Tier I (Planetary Baselines) and en-terprise traffic captures, all raw packet captures (PCAPs) were rigorously sanitized prior to feature extraction. Because AEGIS operates exclusively on topological flow physics, pay-load bytes were deliberately discarded, inherently preserving user data privacy. All Personally Identifiable Information (PII), including IP addresses and MAC addresses, was stripped during preprocessing, ensuring no sensitive user data was retained or evaluated by the neural network. OPEN SCIENCE 

To support independent reproducibility while mitigating the risk of dual-use exploitation by active threat actors, we have adopted a gated release model. The proprietary Tier IV adversarial raw PCAPs (comprising active VLESS Reality, GhostBear, and AMOI traffic) remain under restricted access to prevent the proliferation of advanced evasion tools. However, the fully sanitized 6-dimensional flow physics matrices will be made available. Through our payload-independent extraction pipeline, the 400GB raw PCAP corpus was compressed at a 40:1 ratio into 10GB of highly efficient PyTorch ( .pt ) tensors. These tensors, preserving the exact thermodynamic metrics evaluated in this study, are hosted on a persistent, gated dataset repository at https://huggingface.co/ datasets/Vix0007/AEGIS-Adversarial-Corpus. Academic re-searchers may request access to independently verify the Thermodynamic Variance Detector (TVD) metrics and clas-sification performance. The core AEGIS continuous-time inference engine, includ-ing the proprietary PyTorch architectural implementations, dynamic focal loss configurations, and trained model weights, are retained as closed-source intellectual property under Vixero Technology Enterprise. By releasing the 10GB sanitized 6-dimensional topological tensor dataset, we provide the cy-bersecurity research community with the exact mathematical features required to validate the thermodynamic variance the-ory and train independent continuous-time classifiers, without compromising the proprietary integrity of the AEGIS commer-cial pipeline. REFERENCES [1] E. Rescorla, “The Transport Layer Security (TLS) protocol version 1.3,” Internet Requests for Comments, RFC 8446, 2018. [2] X. Lin, G. Shi, M. Cui, and S. Wang, “ET-BERT: A contextualized datagram representation with pre-training transformers for encrypted traffic classification,” in Proceedings of the ACM Web Conference (WWW) , 2022, pp. 633–642. [3] e. a. Yan, “CERTTA: A robust encrypted traffic classification frame-work,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking , 2025. [4] e. a. Jing, “Adversarial pre-padding: Generating evasive network traffic against transformer-based classifiers,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.25810 ,2025. [5] XTLS Project, “Xray-core VLESS-Reality protocol,” https://github.com/ XTLS/Xray-core, 2023, accessed: 2026. [6] V. Ferrel, “AMOI: Adversarial morphing obfuscating intelligence — traffic morphing for low-latency circumvention in constrained networks,” Technical Report, Vixero Technology Enterprise, Kuching, Sarawak, Malaysia, 2026, manuscript in preparation. [7] M. Nickel and D. Kiela, “Poincar´ e embeddings for learning hierarchical representations,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , vol. 30, 2017. [8] R. Hasani, M. Lechner, A. Amini, D. Rus, and R. Grosu, “Liquid time-constant networks,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , vol. 35, no. 9, 2021, pp. 7657–7666. [9] A. Lahoti, K. Y. Li, B. Chen, C. Wang, A. Bick, J. Z. Kolter, T. Dao, and A. Gu, “Mamba-3: Improved sequence modeling using state space principles,” 2026. [10] A. Gu and T. Dao, “Mamba: Linear-time sequence modeling with selective state spaces,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00752 , 2023. [11] K. Cho, K. Mitsuya, and A. Kato, “Traffic data repository at the WIDE project,” in Proceedings of the USENIX Annual Technical Conference (ATC) , 2000. [12] I. Sharafaldin, A. H. Lashkari, and A. A. Ghorbani, “Toward generating a new intrusion detection dataset and intrusion traffic characterization,” in                         

> Proceedings of the 4th International Conference on Information Systems Security and Privacy (ICISSP) , 2018, pp. 108–116. [13] S. Garcia, A. Parmisano, and M. J. Erquiaga, “IoT-23: A labeled dataset with malicious and benign IoT network traffic,” 2020. [14] S. Garcia et al. , “An empirical comparison of botnet detection methods,”
> Computers & Security , vol. 45, pp. 100–123, 2014. [15] B. Duncan, “Malware-traffic-analysis.net,” https://www. malware-traffic-analysis.net, 2026. [16] Bergeron Centre for Cybersecurity, “BCCC-Mal-NetMem dataset,” https://www.yorku.ca/bccc, 2025. [17] W. Wang, M. Zhu, X. Zeng, X. Ye, and Y. Sheng, “Malware traffic classification using convolutional neural network for representation learning,” in 2017 International Conference on Information Networking (ICOIN) , 2017, pp. 712–717. [18] T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Doll´ ar, “Focal loss for dense object detection,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV) , 2017, pp. 2980–2988. [19] I. Loshchilov and F. Hutter, “Decoupled weight decay regularization,”
> arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.05101 , 2019, published at ICLR 2019.

[20] P. Micikevicius, S. Narang, J. Alben, G. Diamos, E. Elsen, D. Garcia, B. Ginsburg, M. Houston, O. Kuchaiev, G. Venkatesh, and H.-Y. Wu, “Mixed precision training,” in International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR) . NVIDIA, 2018. [21] N. Koroniotis, N. Moustafa, E. Sitnikova, and B. Turnbull, “Towards the development of realistic botnet dataset in the internet of things for network forensic analytics: Bot-iot dataset,” Future Generation Computer Systems , vol. 100, pp. 779–796, 2019. [22] N. Koroniotis, N. Moustafa, E. Sitnikova, and J. Slay, “Towards devel-oping network forensic mechanism for botnet activities in the iot based on machine learning techniques,” in International Conference on Mobile Networks and Management . Springer, Cham, 2017, pp. 30–44. [23] N. Koroniotis, N. Moustafa, and E. Sitnikova, “A new network forensic framework based on deep learning for internet of things networks: A particle deep framework,” Future Generation Computer Systems , vol. 110, pp. 91–106, 2020. [24] N. Koroniotis and N. Moustafa, “Enhancing network forensics with particle swarm and deep learning: The particle deep framework,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2005.00722 , 2020. [25] N. Koroniotis, N. Moustafa, F. Schiliro, P. Gauravaram, and H. Janicke, “A holistic review of cybersecurity and reliability perspectives in smart airports,” IEEE Access , 2020. [26] N. Koroniotis, “Designing an effective network forensic framework for the investigation of botnets in the internet of things,” Ph.D. dissertation, The University of New South Wales Australia, 2020. [27] G. Carlsson, “Topology and data,” Bulletin of the American Mathemat-ical Society , vol. 46, no. 2, pp. 255–308, 2009. [28] F. Sala, C. De Sa, A. Gu, and C. R´ e, “Representation tradeoffs for hyperbolic embeddings,” in Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML) . PMLR, 2018, pp. 4460– 4469. [29] O. Ganea, G. B´ ecigneul, and T. Hofmann, “Hyperbolic neural networks,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) ,vol. 31, 2018. [30] R. T. Q. Chen, Y. Rubanova, J. Bettencourt, and D. K. Duvenaud, “Neu-ral ordinary differential equations,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , vol. 31, 2018, arXiv:1806.07366. [31] Y. Rubanova, R. T. Q. Chen, and D. K. Duvenaud, “Latent ordinary differential equations for irregularly-sampled time series,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , vol. 32, 2019, arXiv:1907.03907. [32] P. Kidger, J. Morrill, J. Foster, and T. Lyons, “Neural controlled differential equations for irregular time series,” in Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) , vol. 33, 2020, pp. 6696– 6707, arXiv:2005.08926. [33] R. Sommer and V. Paxson, “Outside the closed world: On using machine learning for network intrusion detection,” in 2010 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy , 2010, pp. 305–316. [34] G. Apruzzese, M. Andreolini, M. Marchetti, A. Venturi, and M. Cola-janni, “Modeling realistic adversarial attacks against network intrusion detection systems,” Digital Threats: Research and Practice , vol. 2, no. 3, pp. 1–29, 2021. [35] G. Apruzzese, P. Laskov, E. Montes de Oca, W. Mallouli, L. B´ urdalo Rapa, A. V. Grammatopoulos, and F. Di Franco, “The role of machine learning in cybersecurity,” Digital Threats: Research and Practice , vol. 4, no. 1, pp. 1–38, 2023. [36] I. H. Sarker, A. S. M. Kayes, S. Badsha, H. Alqahtani, P. Watters, and A. Ng, “Cybersecurity data science: An overview from machine learning perspective,” Journal of Big Data , vol. 7, pp. 1–29, 2020.