Title: Sublime: Sublinear Error & Space for Unbounded Skewed Streams

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.14190v1

Published Time: Tue, 17 Mar 2026 03:09:50 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
> Accepted to SIGMOD 2026

# Sublime: Sublinear Error & Space for Unbounded Skewed Streams 

Navid Eslami 

navideslami@cs.toronto.edu University of Toronto Toronto, Canada 

Ioana O. Bercea 

bercea@kth.se KTH Royal Institute of Technology Stockholm, Sweden 

Rasmus Pagh 

pagh@di.ku.dk BARC, University of Copenhagen Copenhagen, Denmark 

Niv Dayan 

nivdayan@cs.toronto.edu University of Toronto Toronto, Canada 

ABSTRACT 

Modern stream processing systems must often track the frequency of distinct keys in a data stream in real-time. Since monitoring the exact counts often entails a prohibitive memory footprint, many applications rely on compact, probabilistic data structures called frequency estimation sketches to approximate them. How-ever, mainstream frequency estimation sketches fall short in two critical aspects: (1) They are memory-inefficient under data skew. This is because they use uniformly-sized counters to track the key counts and thus waste memory on storing the leading zeros of many small counter values. (2) Their estimation error deteriorates at least linearly with the stream’s length, which may grow indefi-nitely over time. This is because they count the keys using a fixed number of counters. We present Sublime, a framework that generalizes frequency es-timation sketches to address these problems by dynamically adapt-ing to the stream’s skew and length. To save memory under skew, Sublime uses short counters upfront and elongates them with exten-sions stored within the same cache line as they overflow. It leverages novel bit manipulation routines to quickly access a counter’s ex-tension. It also controls the scaling of its error rate by expanding its number of approximate counters as the stream grows. We apply Sublime to Count-Min Sketch and Count Sketch. We show, theoret-ically and empirically, that Sublime significantly improves accuracy and memory over the state of the art while maintaining competitive or superior performance. 

CCS CONCEPTS 

• Theory of computation → Sketching and sampling ; Bloom filters and hashing ; Lower bounds and information complex-ity ; • Information systems → Data stream mining .

KEYWORDS 

Frequency Estimation Sketch, Data Growth, Scalability. 

Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org. 

SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India 

© 2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM. ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/2018/06. . . $15.00 https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX 

ACM Reference Format: 

Navid Eslami, Ioana O. Bercea, Rasmus Pagh, and Niv Dayan. 2026. Sublime: Sublinear Error & Space for Unbounded Skewed Streams. In Proceedings of Make sure to enter the correct conference title from your rights confirmation email (SIGMOD ’26). ACM, New York, NY, USA, 27 pages. https://doi.org/ XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX 

1 INTRODUCTION 

Data Streams. Modern systems increasingly depend on the real-time statistical analysis of data in high-speed, massive data streams. Because these streams can grow indefinitely, storing them in full (for instance, all packets sent in a network) is often impractical. Even with enough storage, scanning the data to compute the statis-tics (for example, the rows of a SQL table) is expensive. As a result, many applications compute and incrementally maintain statistics as new data arrives or old data is removed. This approach works espe-cially well for simple statistics, such as the sum or the mean, which only require simple mathematical operations (e.g., additions and subtractions) to be maintained accurately. However, for many other types of statistics, such as cardinalities and quantiles, this approach does not work out of the box and requires careful execution. 

Frequency Estimation. One of the most fundamental statistics in data stream analysis is frequency—the number of times each key appears in the stream. Tracking these counts exactly requires maintaining a counter for every distinct key, which leads to a sub-stantial memory overhead if the stream contains many unique keys. To overcome this issue, Frequency Estimation Sketches approximate the counts using a compact, fixed-size structure. At a high level, this structure maps each key to a counter among a small set of counters (e.g., via hashing). It estimates the frequency of a given key based on its corresponding counter. In this way, sketches sig-nificantly reduce the memory footprint, though they introduce estimation errors due the possibility of multiple keys mapping to the same counter. Sketches have become key components across many systems including query optimizers [ 34 , 37 , 38 ], network mon-itors [ 8 , 19 , 21 , 35 , 43 , 48 , 64 ], streaming SQL engines [ 12 ], sensor data analyzers [2, 42], and genome analysis pipelines [66, 80]. 

Different Types of Error. Frequency estimation sketches dif-fer in the nature of the errors they introduce. The Count-Min Sketch [ 20 ] always overestimates a key’s count. This one-sided error makes the Count-Min Sketch suitable for security-critical applications such as detecting denial-of-service [ 74 ] and hardware row hammer [ 11 ] attacks, where misclassifying genuine malicious  

> arXiv:2603.14190v1 [cs.DS] 15 Mar 2026 Accepted to SIGMOD 2026
> SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India Navid Eslami, Ioana O. Bercea, Rasmus Pagh, and Niv Dayan

behavior as benign is unacceptable. The Count Sketch [ 13 ], in con-trast, can both overestimate and underestimate a key’s count. Yet, these errors cancel out on average, yielding unbiased estimates. This property prevents the error from compounding when com-bining or multiplying estimates, making the Count Sketch useful for tasks such as query optimization [ 34 , 37 , 38 ] and covariance estimation [ 24 ]. The Misra-Gries structure [ 56 ] always underesti-mates the key counts. Since Misra-Gries also explicitly tracks (or approximates) the most frequent keys, i.e., the heavy hitters, it is particularly effective for identifying them, as required in anom-aly detection [ 33 , 71 ]. Numerous variants of these sketches have been proposed, each offering distinct tradeoffs between accuracy, space, and processing speed [ 4, 6, 14 , 27 , 28 , 30 , 31 , 46 , 47 , 50 –52, 55, 63, 65, 67, 73, 75–79]. 

Goals. Ideally, a frequency estimation sketch should provide a low estimation error under a modest memory footprint. At the same time, it should ensure high performance to accommodate rapidly growing streams. In this paper, we show that all existing sketches fall short of one or more of these goals due to two core problems. 

Problem 1: Skew. In many real-world streams, the distribution of the key counts is skewed, meaning that most keys have small counts while a few heavy hitters have very high counts [ 7, 9, 46 ]. As a result, most counters within a sketch hold small values while only a few hold large ones. Existing sketches use uniformly-sized counters, which must be long enough to represent the maximum counter value. Consequently, they waste a significant amount of memory storing the unused higher-order bits of small counter values. Several prior works attempt to address this problem by utilizing smaller counters and merging or sharing those that over-flow [ 6 , 14 , 28 , 30 , 31 , 46 , 52 , 78 ]. Nevertheless, these approaches compromise either accuracy or performance. Therefore, the chal-lenge of minimizing memory footprint under skew without harming accuracy or performance persists. 

Problem 2: Unbounded Data Growth. In most applications, data streams grow without bound [ 21 , 34 , 37 , 38 , 43 , 48 ]. Yet, all ex-isting frequency estimation sketches must be allocated with a fixed size from the get-go. This causes their estimation error to scale at least linearly with the stream’s unknown length. Because storing or rescanning the stream is either infeasible or expensive, one cannot reduce the error by reconstructing the sketch. Thus, applications are unable to maintain tight error bounds as the stream grows. This problem is critical when deploying sketches at scale, as reported by the creators of the Apache Data Sketches library [ 45 , 61 ]. Recent works have tackled the challenge of accommodating unbounded data growth for filter data structures [ 5, 9, 16 , 25 , 26 , 29 , 58 ]. This paper is the first to address this problem for frequency estima-tion sketches. 

Solution: Sublime. We introduce Sublime 1, a framework that generalizes frequency estimation sketches to address the above two challenges. To address Problem 1 (Skew), Sublime allocates small counters upfront and dynamically extends them as they overflow. It colocates each counter and its extension within the same cache line 

> 1Sublime is a play on words referring to the sublinearly scaling errors and memory footprint of our framework. It also describes, in the philosophical tradition of Immanuel Kant, the feeling of awe experienced when contemplating something vast or infinite. This notion of infinity resonates with the theme of our work, which addresses the challenge of accommodating indefinite data growth.

Symbol Definition 

𝑁 The sum of the counts of all keys in the stream. 

𝑥, 𝑦 Example keys from the stream. 

𝑓 (𝑥 ) The ground-truth count of key 𝑥 .

ˆ𝑓 (𝑥 ) The estimated count of key 𝑥 .

𝑤 Number of counters/slots. 

𝑑 Number of independent arrays. 

ℎ𝑖 (𝑥 ) Hash function mapping key 𝑥 to a counter. 

𝜎 𝑖 (𝑥 ) Hash function defining key 𝑥 ’s update direction ( ±1). 

𝑐 Number of counters in each chunk. 

𝑠 Length of each stub in bits. 

𝑊 (·) Size function. 

Table 1: Definitions of terms and symbols. 

and employs specialized bit manipulation routines to decode them in constant time. To resolve Problem 2 (Unbounded Data Growth), Sublime expands its number of counters as the stream grows. In doing so, it bounds both the error and the memory footprint and establishes a Pareto frontier of tradeoffs to choose from. 

Additional Contributions. 

(1) We analyze existing techniques for addressing skew and show that, when applied to mainstream frequency estima-tion sketches such as Count-Min Sketch, they cause the estimation error to grow super-linearly with the stream’s size, as opposed to linearly. (2) We introduce a constant-time va riable-length data e ncoding scheme (VALE), applicable beyond sketches. In this work, we use VALE to encode variable-length counters. (3) We characterize the accuracy vs. memory tradeoffs Sublime offers as it dynamically expands. (4) We prove a lower bound on the minimum space required for any expandable frequency estimation sketch to achieve a target error and show that Sublime’s memory footprint meets this bound. (5) We apply Sublime to two representative sketches—Count-Min Sketch and Count Sketch—to demonstrate its generality. In the appendix, we provide a roadmap for applying Sublime to Misra-Gries as future work. (6) We evaluate Sublime against state-of-the-art frequency es-timation sketches and show that it significantly reduces memory consumption under skew and error under growing streams while maintaining equal or better performance. We also apply Sublime to estimate the size of a join between two tables and show that it returns more accurate results than other frequency estimation sketches. 

2 BACKGROUND 

A stream is a sequence of key-value pairs ⟨(𝑥 1, ∆1), (𝑥 2, ∆2), . . . ⟩,where 𝑥 𝑖 is the 𝑖 -th key that appears in the stream and ∆𝑖 = ±1

represents whether its count was incremented due to an insertion (∆𝑖 = 1 ) or decremented due to a deletion ( ∆𝑖 = −1). This is known as the General Turnstile Model of data streams [ 32 ]. We denote key 𝑥 ’s count by 𝑓 (𝑥 ), and represent the current total count of the keys in the stream with 𝑁 = P𝑥 𝑓 (𝑥 ) = P𝑖 ∆𝑖 . Table 1 lists the terms and symbols used throughout the paper. Accepted to SIGMOD 2026  

> Sublime: Sublinear Error & Space for Unbounded Skewed Streams SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India

Insert 𝑥    

> ℎ1(𝑥 ),+1
> ℎ2(𝑥 ),+1
> ℎ3(𝑥 ),+1

Query 𝑞 

Result = 1 

> Min
> ℎ1(𝑞 )
> ℎ2(𝑞 )
> ℎ3(𝑞 )
> 1
> 4
> 3

Figure 1: CMS maintains 𝑑 counter arrays of size 𝑤 and hashes keys into them to estimate their frequencies. Insertions are illustrated on the left and queries on the right. Exhaustive Approach. The simplest approach to tracking fre-quencies is to store each key and its count in a hash table. Although this approach is fully accurate, it entails a high memory overhead for three reasons: (i) It stores all keys in the stream. Variable-length keys worsen this overhead since they require an indirection layer (e.g., pointers). (ii) It stores one counter for each unique key. (iii) The hash table may occasionally be as much as half empty to support col-lision resolution and expansions. These different overheads multiply with the number of streams the application monitors. Problems (i) and (ii) imply a memory footprint that is linear in the number of unique keys in the stream, which can be of the same magnitude as the total key count 𝑁 .Frequency estimation sketches address these problems by trading accuracy for space. That is, for any key 𝑥 , a sketch returns an estimate ˆ𝑓 (𝑥 ) of 𝑥 ’s count 𝑓 (𝑥 ). We focus on Count-Min Sketch [ 20 ]for now, as it is the simplest and most widely used sketch [ 49 ,54 ]. Later, we describe Count Sketch [ 13 ] (Section 4.3) and Misra-Gries [56] (Section A) and apply our techniques to them. 

Count-Min Sketch (CMS). The core design element of CMS is a counter array consisting of 𝑤 counters, each initialized to zero. We insert a key 𝑥 into this array by hashing it to one counter and incrementing it. We delete 𝑥 by decrementing its corresponding counter. 2 The counter that key 𝑥 hashes to provides an estimate of 𝑥 ’s count. Due to hash collisions, multiple keys can map to the same counter. Because of this, we may overestimate the count of a key 𝑥 . This error is at most 𝑁 𝑤 in expectation since a key participates in a hash collision with a probability of 1 

> 𝑤

and the total count of keys different from 𝑥 is at most 𝑁 . Increasing the array’s size makes collisions less likely, thereby decreasing the error and improving 

Accuracy . Even still, the error may deviate from its expectation. The probability that errors do not exceed the expectation “too much” is known as the sketch’s Confidence . An application of Markov’s inequality shows that the error does not exceed 𝑒𝑁 𝑤 with a confi-dence of at least 1 − 𝑒 −1, i.e., Pr 



| ˆ𝑓 (𝑥 ) − 𝑓 (𝑥 )|≤ 𝑒𝑁 𝑤 



≥ 1 − 𝑒 −1 for any key 𝑥 . Here, we use Euler’s constant 𝑒 due to convention. Any other constant would also work and would replace 𝑒 in both the accuracy bound and the confidence. This implies that the smaller the constant becomes, i.e., the more accurate we expect the sketch to be, the lower confidence drops. Yet, with a single array, confidence is low ( ≈ 63% ). The reason is that all keys hashing to the same counter as a frequent key will suffer from inflated estimates. Moreover, since there are many keys 

> 2Users must ensure deletions target previously inserted keys. This is because frequency estimation sketches do not store the keys and cannot check a deletion’s validity.

with low or moderate counts, there is a non-negligible chance that enough of them map to the same counter and inflate estimates beyond the error bound. CMS addresses these issues by allocating 𝑑 

independent counter arrays, each with a dedicated hash function ℎ𝑖 .CMS inserts or deletes a key by applying the operation to each array, and it answers a query by querying all arrays and taking the minimum of the estimates. 3 Figure 1 shows an example of insertions and queries applied to three counter arrays. Returning the minimum for queries boosts confidence exponentially, since it only carries severe errors when all estimates err significantly. Thus, with 𝑑 arrays of length 𝑤 , CMS guarantees an error of at most 𝑒𝑁 𝑤 

with a confidence of 1 − 𝑒 −𝑑 , i.e., Pr 



| ˆ𝑓 (𝑥 ) − 𝑓 (𝑥 )|≤ 𝑒𝑁 𝑤 



≥ 1 − 𝑒 −𝑑 

for any key 𝑥 .Since CMS uses a constant number of tightly packed counters and does not store the stream’s keys, it significantly improves the memory footprint compared to the exhaustive approach of tracking each key’s exact count. Nevertheless, CMS still suffers from several memory inefficiencies, as we show in the following section. 

3 PROBLEM ANALYSIS 

Traditional frequency estimation sketches, such as CMS, use more memory than necessary by failing to account for 1) the skew in the stream and 2) the stream’s gradual growth over time. 

3.1 Challenge 1: Skew 

With uniform workloads, most counters in CMS take on similar values. In contrast, under skewed workloads with a few heavy hitters, most counter values remain small while only a few grow large. Because CMS relies on uniformly-sized counters that must be sufficiently long to store the maximum counter value, it wastes substantial memory by allocating excessive bits to the many coun-ters with small values. Ideally, each counter should be just long enough to fit its value, thereby saving space or allowing the storage of more counters to improve accuracy. 

Hybrid Methods. A common strategy for tackling this prob-lem is to track the heavy hitters separately in a hash table while leaving the rest of the keys to CMS [ 47 , 63 , 67 , 75 – 77 ]. Such hy-brid structures aim to cap the maximum counter value in CMS, thereby permitting shorter counters. Yet, this approach does not fundamentally resolve the issue. The reasons are twofold: The keys tracked by CMS may still follow a skewed distribution, leading to significant memory wastage. Moreover, the heavy hitters can vary over time. Identifying the next heavy hitter and “promoting” it from CMS into the hash table is error-prone, since collisions in CMS can cause many infrequent keys to be misclassified as heavy hitters. The hybrid structures in the literature explore different hash table implementations and promotion policies. 

Compression-based Methods. Other approaches compress the counters using algorithms such as compressive sensing [ 28 ,52 ] or hypergraph peeling [ 15 ]. Yet, these methods impose heavy decompression overheads on queries. 

Counter Sharing. Counter sharing approaches store the counter values in a hierarchy of counters, with the lowest level storing the  

> 3CMS uses pairwise-independent hash functions to bound the probability of collisions and overestimation [20]. Accepted to SIGMOD 2026
> SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India Navid Eslami, Ioana O. Bercea, Rasmus Pagh, and Niv Dayan
> Shared

. . . . . . 001101 001000 001000 111000 

> 00
> 10

Counter Sharing 

> Merged

. . . . . . 0000110010000000 00100000 11100000 

Counter Merging 

. . . . . . 001101001000 001000000000 001000000000 111000000000 

CMS 

Figure 2: Counter sharing and counter merging encode CMS’s counters in less space in exchange for blowing up some counter values. Here, the bits in the binary representations are in increasing order of significance from left to right. 

counter values in short counters and the upper levels handling overflows using shared counters [ 14 , 28 , 30 , 31 , 46 , 52 , 78 ]. The left side of Figure 2 encodes four adjacent counters within CMS using such a hierarchy with 6-bit and 2-bit counters. Whenever a counter in this hierarchy overflows, it increments its parent and resets itself back to zero. A counter’s value is retrieved by con-catenating the counters along its path to the root until reaching a delimiter, typically indicated using additional metadata. While counter sharing yields state-of-the-art accuracy and performance for short streams, its error rapidly deteriorates as the stream grows. In particular, after 𝑁 insertions into an array of size 𝑤 , each counter overflows into the Θ( log (𝑁 /𝑤 )) levels above it. This blows up the values of Θ( 𝑁 /𝑤 ) other counters, increasing the estimation error by the same factor. The counter sharing methods in the literature experiment with the hierarchy’s structure by varying the counter sizes and the fanout. 

Counter Merging. Counter merging is an alternative approach that starts with 8-bit counters and merges adjacent overflowing counters into a longer counter that sums the original values [ 6 ]. The right side of Figure 2 applies this scheme to CMS. After 𝑁 

insertions into an array of 𝑤 counters, each counter will be merged with Θ( log (𝑁 /𝑤 )) other counters, increasing the error by the same factor. Merging only continues until the counters become the same length as those of CMS, at which point error degradation stops. Counter merging has a higher metadata overhead than counter sharing for indicating which counters are merged, leaving less space for storing counters. Parsing this metadata is also complex, reducing performance. 

Deletions. Deletions deteriorate the accuracy of both counter sharing and counter merging methods since these techniques am-biguate how counters should be “separated” as their values decrease. 

Comparison. Figure 3 qualitatively compares counter sharing and counter merging to a CMS with the same memory footprint to illustrate their error degradation with data growth. While these methods perform well for short streams, their error exceeds that of CMS as the stream grows. We empirically verify this behavior in Experiment 4 of Section 6. 

3.2 Challenge 2: Unbounded Growth 

In many streaming applications, the data stream grows continu-ously, and it is imperative to estimate the count of each key from the stream’s beginning. For instance, query optimizers often track the number of times each key occurs in a table column to estimate 

Total Key Count 𝑁           

> Error
> CMS Error =𝑁 𝑤
> Counter Sharing Error =Θ
> 
> min
> 𝑁 𝑤 ,𝑤
> 
> ·𝑁 𝑤
> 
> Counter Merging Error =Θ
> 
> min
> 
> log 𝑁 𝑤 ,32
> 
> ·𝑁 𝑤
> 

Figure 3: Under the same memory budget as a CMS instance with 32-bit counters, counter sharing and counter merging can lead to lower accuracy when processing a growing stream. 

the size of a join on that column [ 34 , 37 , 38 ]. As new data is inserted, the total number of keys 𝑁 increases. Yet, the full count history of each key is still needed, since every occurrence contributes equally to the join size regardless of when it arrived. Unbounded stream growth is also a challenge for applications that only require key counts over recent time windows. For exam-ple, network management systems detect anomalous or malicious activity by counting packets from each source within fixed time windows [ 21 , 43 , 48 ]. With bursty streams such as network traffic, the number of keys 𝑁 in each window is unpredictable. In existing frequency estimation sketches, the number of coun-ters 𝑤 is fixed at allocation time. Consequently, the expected error degrades linearly with 𝑁 (e.g., 𝑁 /𝑤 in the case of CMS). Hoping to balance accuracy and memory, practitioners tune 𝑤 without knowledge of the final stream length 𝑁 . This tuning is non-trivial, however, as having too few counters leads to significant errors, while having too many wastes memory. Deletions make the prob-lem more challenging by causing 𝑁 to fluctuate over time. Worse yet, even if the ultimate stream length is known upfront, allocating a large CMS from the start wastes memory during the early stages when the stream is short. 

Summary. An ideal frequency estimation sketch should: 1) com-pactly encode counter values without incurring memory waste from skew, 2) scale its size with the stream’s length to keep both the memory footprint and the error rate under control, 3) support dele-tions without sacrificing accuracy, and 4) provide high-performance operations. Is it possible to achieve all these goals simultaneously? 

4 SUBLIME 

We present Sublime, a framework for generalizing a frequency es-timation sketch to optimize its memory footprint with respect to the stream’s skew and its length. Section 4.1 shows how to adapt to skew by compactly encoding each counter as a short integer and extending it as it overflows. Section 4.2 shows how to control both accuracy and space for a stream of unknown length by expanding and contracting the sketch. At the same time, Sublime supports dele-tions and maintains high performance. We first describe Sublime as applied to the Count-Min Sketch (CMS), denoted as Sublime CMS .We apply Sublime to other sketches in Section 4.3 and Section A. 

4.1 Accommodating Skew 

Under skew, many counter values in CMS will be small and not use all the bits in their counters. To optimize the space used for storing Accepted to SIGMOD 2026  

> Sublime: Sublinear Error & Space for Unbounded Skewed Streams SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India

01 . . . 

Overflows 

0

Mode 

01 10 11 . . . 

Delimiter 

Extension Pool 

111111 101010 . . . 

Stubs 

111111 0000 . . . 

Counter 0 

101010 1010 . . . 

Counter 1 

Figure 4: VALE encodes a chunk of 𝑐 counters in a cache line. It encodes the 𝑠 lower-order bits of each counter in a stub and stores its remaining higher-order bits in extensions comprised of 2-bit fragments representing base-3 digits. Here, we use a stub length of 𝑠 = 6 .

these counter values in any workload, Sublime CMS generalizes CMS with a general-purpose va riable- length count e r (VALE) encoding. VALE stores the counters as fixed-size integers called Stubs . When a counter overflows its stub, VALE elongates it with a dedicated variable-length Extension . Due to their need for delimiters, storing extensions entails a slight metadata overhead. We counteract this overhead by choosing the stub length based on the workload’s skew so that more counter values fit in their stubs without need-ing extensions. More precisely, we choose the shortest stub length that minimizes the total memory footprint of the stubs and the extensions. We adapt this stub length to the workload by reconfig-uring it when the total number of overflows exceeds a threshold. To improve cache behavior and quickly reconstruct a counter, VALE colocates a stub and its corresponding extension in the same cache line. It quickly finds a stub’s extension using a bit manipulation workflow that leverages rank and select operations. 

Chunking. To colocate stubs and their extensions in 512-bit cache lines, VALE partitions each counter array into contiguous 

Chunks , each occupying a cache line. A chunk stores its counters’ stubs in a contiguous array and tracks the counters that overflow their stubs using an Overflows Bitmap with one bit per counter. It stores the extensions of these overflowing counters contigu-ously in the remaining space towards its end, called its Extension Pool . Counter 0 and Counter 1 in Figure 4 are examples of a non-overflowing and overflowing counter within a chunk, respectively. 

Parameters. VALE has two parameters: the number of bits in each stub 𝑠 and the number of counters per chunk 𝑐 . With more skewed workloads, having shorter stubs and more counters per chunk reduces space consumption. The reason is that skew shrinks most counter values, enabling the use of shorter stubs for stor-ing them. Skew also reduces the average length of the extensions, leaving more space in a chunk to store more counters. Later in this section, we discuss how to adapt the tuning of these parameters to the workload as the stream evolves. When the workload is uniform, this procedure tunes the stub length so that all counter values fit in stubs, allowing it to remove the overflows bitmaps and yield the configuration of a standard CMS. We illustrate the impact of this procedure on the memory footprint in Section 6. 

Extensions. We form extensions from 2-bit Fragments to encode the higher-order bits of overflowing counters succinctly and to ex-tend them at the finest possible granularity. We use the fragment 11 

as a delimiter at the end of each extension. The other three combi-nations of bits are used to encode each extension’s value in base 3. Specifically, the base-3 digits (0) 3, (1) 3, and (2) 3 are represented as the fragments 00 , 10 , and 01 , respectively. We store fragments 

010 1 . . . 

Overflows 

rank (3 , Overflows ) = 1 

. . . 01 10 

Skipped 

11 01 11 10 . . . 

Extension Pool 

& 00 11 01 10 11 11 . . . Right Shift 

00 10 01 00 11 10 . . . 

& 01 01 01 01 01 01 . . . Mask 

00 00 01 00 01 00 . . . Delimiters 

select (1 , Delimiters ) = 9 

Figure 5: Sublime CMS applies rank and select operations to locate an overflowing counter’s extension. 

in increasing order of their digits’ significance from left to right. Formally, a value 𝑣 is encoded in an extension by representing each of its log 3 𝑣  + 1 digits in a fragment, with the 𝑗 -th digit being 𝑣 𝑗 = 𝑣 /3𝑗  mod 3 . We decode 𝑣 back into a 32-bit binary integer by computing the sum 30 · 𝑣 0 + 3 1 · 𝑣 1 + . . . . At the end of this section, we show how Sublime CMS efficiently computes this sum without multiplication operations. For example, the value 5, which is the value of the higher-order bits of Counter 1 in Figure 4, has two digits in base 3. It is there-fore encoded as the extension ⟨(2) 3, (1) 3, delimiter ⟩ = ⟨01 , 10 , 11 ⟩.Decoding this extension yields 30 · 2 + 3 1 · 1 = 5 , as expected. Forming a chunk’s extensions from 2-bit fragments allows them to fit in 1-2 machine words in most cases. We prove in Section 5 that using these extensions in conjunction with short stubs enables VALE to encode each counter’s value in space close to the length of its binary encoding. VALE is able to compactly encode arbitrary variable-length data by treating the binary representation of each data item as the value of a counter. Thus, it can be used in other applications operating on such data to improve memory efficiency. 

Locating an Extension. To decode an overflowing counter, VALE must locate its extension. To this end, it keeps the extensions in the same order as that of the counters. It locates the 𝑖 -th counter’s extension by counting the number of preceding bits set to 1s in the overflows bitmap. This is equivalent to the number of overflowing counters preceding the 𝑖 -th counter, denoted by 𝑚 . Skipping over the first 𝑚 extensions in the extension pool leads to the position of the target extension. Figure 5 illustrates the process of identifying the 3rd counter’s extension in a chunk. Here, since the 3rd bit in the overflows bitmap is 1, the 3rd counter has an extension. As there is one bit set to 1 before the 3rd bit in the overflows bitmap, we skip one extension to locate the 3rd counter’s extension, shown in gray. 

Fast Access Using Rank and Select. VALE quickly locates the extension of an overflowing counter using rank and select operations [ 17 , 44 , 57 , 59 , 81 ]. Given a bitmap 𝐵 , the rank (𝑖, 𝐵 )

operation counts the number of 1s strictly before the 𝑖 -th bit, and the select (𝑖, 𝐵 ) operation returns the position of the 𝑖 -th 1. Later in this section, we show how to use specialized CPU instructions to implement these operations efficiently. The first step is to determine 𝑚 , the number of overflowing counters to the left of the 𝑖 -th counter. As this is the number of 1s Accepted to SIGMOD 2026  

> SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India Navid Eslami, Ioana O. Bercea, Rasmus Pagh, and Niv Dayan

11 . . . 1

Mode 

Pointer 111111 000101 . . . 

1000 . . . 1110 . . . . . . Tails 

111111 1000 . . . 

Counter 0 

000101 1110 . . . 

Counter 1 

Figure 6: When a chunk’s extensions outgrow its space, it stores a pointer to a dedicated external array of tails to store the counters’ higher-order bits. 

before the 𝑖 -th bit in the overflows bitmap, VALE applies the rank operation to evaluate 𝑚 = rank (𝑖, overflows ).The second step is to identify the target extension’s delimiter by skipping over the 𝑚 delimiters preceding it. We do this using several bit manipulation techniques. First, we convert the extension pool into a so-called Delimiters Bitmap . This bitmap contains one bit set to 1 at the position of every delimiter and 0s everywhere else, as illustrated at the bottom right of Figure 5. To derive this bitmap, we take the bitwise-and of the extension pool with a version of itself shifted to the right by one bit. The result is a bitmap with a 1 at the end of any two consecutive 1s in the original extension pool, as illustrated in Figure 5. This means that every bit in this bitmap corresponding to the second bit of a fragment is set to 1 if the fragment is a delimiter and is set to 0 otherwise. We mask out all other bits to 0s. In sum, the delimiters bitmap is derived as delimiters = extensions & (extensions >> 1 ) & 0101 . . . 0101 .Finally, we use the select operation to evaluate select (𝑚, delimiters ),which skips over the first 𝑚 delimiters and returns the position of the 𝑚 -th delimiter. We sequentially apply the bitwise operations above to each machine word comprising the chunk’s extensions. Locating extensions in this way is efficient, as a chunk’s extensions often fit in 1-2 words. Figure 5 shows an example of locating the 3rd counter’s exten-sion using rank and select. Here, rank (3 , overflows ) = 1 . Thus, after deriving the delimiters bitmap by manipulating the extension pool, VALE evaluates select (1 , delimiters ) = 9 to conclude that the target extension ends at the 9th bit. 

Tails. In the rare event that many heavy hitters hash to the same chunk, many of the chunk’s counters will overflow, potentially growing the cumulative length of the extensions beyond the size of the chunk. VALE handles this case by allocating an external array of 32-bit integers called Tails for the chunk, with one tail integer per counter. It stores the 𝑖 -th counter’s higher-order bits in the 𝑖 -th tail in binary. Each chunk contains a mode flag indicating if it has a tails array, as depicted in Figure 6. If it does, we repurpose the space taken up by the extension pool to store a pointer to the tails array. We ensure that the extension pool is large enough to accommodate this pointer (i.e., at least 48 bits 4.) when tuning the number of counters per chunk and the stub size. Any space after the pointer is unused.    

> 4The upper 16 bits in a 64-bit pointer are unused on many operating systems due to their use of 4-level paging [ 23 ]. As such, we only store the lower 48 bits of the pointer. That said, modern machines and operating systems have moved towards using 5-level paging [ 22 ], which uses 57-bit addresses. Despite this shift, operating systems like Linux still default to using 48-bit addresses for compatibility reasons [39]

Adaptive Tuning. To minimize space usage and ensure that a small fraction of memory is overprovisioned at any time, Sublime CMS 

adaptively retunes VALE’s number of counters per chunk 𝑐 and its stub length 𝑠 . It does so whenever more than 1% of the chunks use tails arrays, or there are more than two unused bits per counter. 5

During tuning, Sublime CMS packs as many counters as possible within each chunk while ensuring that extensions rarely outgrow their chunks. Concretely, it scans the entire sketch and computes a histogram of the counter values based on their bit length. It uses this histogram to calculate the expected total length of a chunk’s extensions for a given combination of parameters 𝑐 and 𝑠 . It enu-merates the possible combinations by first varying 𝑐 from largest to smallest and then enumerating 𝑠 from smallest to largest for each fixed 𝑐 . For each combination, it applies Chebyshev’s inequality to the total extension length within a chunk to derive a conservative bound on the proportion of chunks that will use tails arrays. It chooses the first combination that yields a bound smaller than 0.5% .As a side effect of this tuning procedure, Sublime CMS sets the stub length 𝑠 to be slightly longer than the length of the average counter value. This reduces the number of extensions and makes the number of stored tails arrays and their memory overhead negligible. The amortized cost of tuning VALE is small, as many more up-dates than the number of counters are required to trigger retuning. We demonstrate this under Experiment 3 of Section 6. 

Different Cache Line Sizes. The aforementioned tuning pro-cedure also allows Sublime CMS to support different cache line sizes. Having smaller cache lines leads to the tuning procedure storing fewer counters per chunk. This reduction increases the variance of the total size of a chunk’s extensions, causing the tuning procedure to slightly increase the overprovisioned space for the chunk’s exten-sion pool. 6 Conversely, having larger cache lines does not increase the required overprovisioned space, though it may degrade query performance. This is because locating a counter’s extension be-comes more expensive as extension pools grow. Sublime CMS easily addresses this problem by storing multiple chunks per cache line (e.g., two 512-bit chunks within a 1024-bit cache line). 

Incrementing Counters. When an insertion maps to the 𝑖 -th counter within a chunk, Sublime CMS increments it by adding one to the lower-order bits stored in the 𝑖 -th stub, i.e., stub[ 𝑖 ]. Most of the time, stub[ 𝑖 ]’s increment does not carry over to the counter’s higher-order bits, allowing the insertion to terminate early and achieve high throughput. Whenever stub[ 𝑖 ]’s increment carries over, Sublime CMS adds one to the counter’s extension or tail. For an extension, this entails incrementing its first digit and propagating a carry to the other digits as necessary. This carry may propagate beyond the end of the extension, leading to the addition of a new digit. Sublime CMS makes room for the fragment representing this digit by shifting subsequent extensions to the right. If the 𝑖 -th counter did not have an extension, a new extension encoding the value 1 is created for it. We use rank and select operations to determine the appropriate position of this extension in the extension pool. Updating a counter’s higher-order bits is much simpler if they are stored within a tail’s binary integer.  

> 5These conditions lead to at most 20% overprovisioned space upfront when counters are short (1 byte). This fraction decreases quickly as the counters grow.
> 6We have observed that reducing the cache line size from 512 bits to 256 and 128 bits increases the proportion of overprovisioned memory by 5% and 6%, respectively. Accepted to SIGMOD 2026
> Sublime: Sublinear Error & Space for Unbounded Skewed Streams SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India

For the heavy hitters (which comprise most of the stream), this yields faster insertions, as their counters often use tails. 

Decrementing Counters. Analogously, when a deletion maps to the 𝑖 -th counter in a chunk, Sublime CMS decrements the lower-order bits in stub[ 𝑖 ]. If stub[ 𝑖 ] borrows from the counter’s higher-order bits as a result, Sublime CMS decrements the corresponding extension or tail. This may trigger the removal of a digit from the counter’s extension, in which case subsequent extensions are shifted to the left to keep the extension pool tightly packed. 

Optimization 1: Fast Division. Determining the chunk of a counter at offset 𝑖 in an array is expensive, as it entails computing the remainder of dividing 𝑖 by the number of counters per chunk 𝑐 ,which may not be a power of two. We avoid this cost by simulating the division through fixed-point multiplication [ 72 ]. Specifically, we compute the expression 

j 

𝑖 /2⌈log 2 𝑐 ⌉



·



2⌈log 2 𝑐 ⌉ /𝑐 

k 

= ⌊𝑖 /𝑐 ⌋ by approximating the multiplicands on the left-hand side as fractional binary numbers with a fixed number of precision bits. To this end, we precompute the latter multiplicand’s fixed-point representation with log 2 𝑤  precision bits, where 𝑤 is the size of an array. This many bits of precision ensures that, when multiplying by a counter offset 𝑖 smaller than 𝑤 , the result has an error of at most one, al-lowing Sublime CMS to safely truncate it to compute the chunk’s (integral) offset. For the former multiplicand, we treat 𝑖 ’s binary representation as a fixed-point fractional value with log 2 𝑐  preci-sion bits. Finally, we multiply these values using standard integer multiplication and shift the result log 2 𝑤 + log 2 𝑐  bits to the right to remove the precision bits and derive the answer. 

Optimization 2: Hardware Accelerated Rank and Select. 

Sublime CMS utilizes specialized CPU instructions to implement rank and select operations. It implements rank (𝑖, 𝐵 ) by applying the POPCNT instruction to the first ⌈𝑖 /64 ⌉ words of the bitmap 𝐵 

to count the 1s before the 𝑖 -th bit. 7 It also implements select (𝑖, 𝐵 )

by counting the 1s in 𝐵 ’s words to locate the word containing the 

𝑖 -th 1. Once found, it applies the x86 instructions PDEP and TZCNT 

to evaluate the target bit’s position within that word, as described in [ 59 ]. 8 Each of these commands is applied to 1-2 machine words, as the bitmaps Sublime CMS operates over are 1-2 words long. Sublime CMS includes fallback implementations of rank and se-lect for processors that lack the above instructions. We employ two lookup tables structured as direct-access arrays: one for counting the number of 1s in a byte to compute rank, and one for applying select within a byte. The entry corresponding to the value of a byte and the parameter of the operation in each table indicates the result of the relevant operation with these inputs. Since each byte has 256 possible combinations of bits and the input of select ranges from 0 to 7, each array has at most 2048 entries. Therefore, these tables fit in the L1 cache. Sublime CMS iteratively applies these tables to the bytes within a bitmap to evaluate rank and select. Doing so slightly degrades query performance, as queries must always retrieve the ex-tension of a counter. Nevertheless, insertions and deletions remain unaffected since they rarely access a counter’s extension.                                     

> 7Formally, denoting the 𝑗 -th word in 𝐵 as 𝐵 𝑗 , this process corresponds to computing
> POPCNT  𝐵 ⌊𝑖 /64 ⌋&((1 << (𝑖 mod 64)) −1) +P⌊𝑖 /64 ⌋− 1
> 𝑗 =0 POPCNT (𝐵 𝑗 ).
> 8If the 𝑗 -th word 𝐵 𝑗 contains the 𝑖 -th 1 and there are 𝑟 1s in the preceding words, the result is computed as 64 ·𝑗 +TZCNT (PDEP ((1 << (𝑖 −𝑟 )) −1, 𝐵 𝑗 )) , where the first operand of PDEP is the payload and the second operand is the mask [18].

Optimization 3: Lookup Tables. Since stubs are not byte-aligned, modifying them can be costly. This is because extracting and writing back a stub to the machine words containing it en-tails five extra bitwise operations on top of the addition operation. Sublime CMS bypasses this cost by directly updating the stub’s words using a single addition. It achieves this using two precomputed lookup tables. The first table stores the position of the word each stub lies in, and the second table stores the stub’s position within its word. Sublime CMS updates a stub by adding or subtracting one from the bit indicated by the second table in the word indicated by the first. For example, in the context of Figure 4, the first lookup table indicates that the 1st stub lies in the 1st word, which has a binary representation of 111111101010 . . . . The second lookup table indicates that this stub starts at the 6th bit in the 1st word, allowing us to increment it by adding 000000100000 . . . , thus yield-ing 111111011010 . . . as the updated word. 

Optimization 4: Prefetching. We allow multiple chunks to be read in parallel within a single operation as well as across multiple operations using prefetching techniques similar to that of [ 46 ]. Specifically, we maintain a prefetching queue for each array in Sublime CMS that records the eight most recent requests for chunks. Each time a chunk is requested from an array, a software prefetch instruction is issued for it, and the request is pushed into the array’s queue. When a queue fills up, the chunk of its oldest request will be present in the L1 cache, allowing it to be read efficiently while other chunks are being loaded into the cache. 

Optimization 5: Hash Splicing. Recall that a key is hashed into each of the sketch’s 𝑑 arrays during an update or query. Instead of applying 𝑑 separate hash functions and incurring their CPU overheads, Sublime CMS applies a single hash function to the key to compute a long hash. It splices the result into 𝑑 sub-hashes of equal length and uses each as the hash value of an array. 

Optimization 6: Horner’s Method with Shifts and Adds. 

Sublime CMS decodes a counter’s extension with digits 𝑣 0, 𝑣 1, · · · , 𝑣 𝑘 

by computing the sum 30 · 𝑣 0 + 3 1 · 𝑣 1 + · · · + 3 𝑘 · 𝑣 𝑘 . We speed up this process using Horner’s method [ 36 , 41 ] and implementing multiplication by 3 using shift and add operations [ 72 ]. Specifically, we compute a running sum starting from the last term (i.e., initial-izing the sum to 30 · 𝑣 𝑘 ) and move towards the first term, handling them one by one. That is, we handle 𝑣 𝑘 −1 by multiplying the run-ning sum by 3 and adding 𝑣 𝑘 −1 to derive the sum 30 · 𝑣 𝑘 −1 + 3 1 · 𝑣 𝑘 ,and so on. We multiply the running sum by 3 by adding it to a copy of itself shifted to the left by one bit (which is equivalent to multiplication by 2). 

4.2 Accommodating Unbounded Growth 

Recall from Section 3 that processing growing streams with exist-ing frequency estimation sketches (e.g., CMS) yields an estimation error that increases at least linearly with the total key count 𝑁 .It is difficult to bound the error of these sketches without wast-ing memory, as the final value of 𝑁 is often unknown. Sublime addresses this issue by generalizing a sketch to increase its number of counters as the stream grows. In the case of CMS, Sublime CMS 

expands whenever 𝑁 exceeds a tunable threshold. An expansion concatenates the current sketch with a copy of itself, doubling the size of each array. This operation is inexpensive since it simply Accepted to SIGMOD 2026  

> SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India Navid Eslami, Ioana O. Bercea, Rasmus Pagh, and Niv Dayan

3 1

3 1

4 0

3 5 4 8

6 3 6 5

9 1 8 2

3 5 4 8 8453

6 3 6 5 5636

9 1 8 2 2819

Expansion 

𝑁 > 4 𝑁 > 16 𝑁 > 64 

Query 𝑞 

Result = 5

> Min

Figure 7: Sublime CMS expands by concatenating each array with a copy of itself. It maps a key to a counter in an array by taking the appropriate number of bits from its hash. 

copies counters without needing to rehash the keys. These larger arrays reduce the collision probability of future insertions. Figure 7 illustrates Sublime CMS just after the second expansion took place (on the right), as well as its state just before the first expansion (left) and the second (middle). Each half of an array in the largest sketch is a copy of the corresponding array just before the second expansion. The counters in each array before this expansion sum to the expansion threshold of 16, plus the total value of the counters copied from the previous expansion, i.e., 4. Queries follow the same algorithm as CMS, targeting the newly expanded, largest sketch. Sublime CMS maintains 𝑑 arrays across expansions to ensure a sta-ble confidence bound on the estimation errors while retaining the same 𝑂 (𝑑 ) time complexity as CMS. 

Consistent Hash Functions. Sublime CMS uses the same hash function for each of its arrays across expansions. It hashes a key to a counter within an array of size 𝑤 by taking the log 2 𝑤 lower-order bits of its hash. This ensures that after an expansion, a key hashes to either the same counter it would have hashed to before, or its copy. 9 For example, the queried key 𝑞 in Figure 7 has ℎ1(𝑞 ) = 011 . . . 

as its hash. Since the size of the array before expansion was 4, we only needed the first log 2 4 = 2 bits of 𝑞 ’s hash, i.e., 01, to map it to the 2nd counter in the first array. After expansion, we use the first log 2 8 = 3 bits of the hash, i.e., 011, to map it to the 6th counter, which is a copy of the 2nd counter before expansion. 

Initial Size. Sublime CMS initializes each of its 𝑑 arrays to a single chunk (i.e., a cache line) containing 𝑐 counters, as described in Section 4.1. Thus, it avoids wasting memory from the onset in case the stream grows slowly. 

Expansion Thresholds. By default, Sublime CMS expands when-ever 𝑁 quadruples. As shown at the bottom of Figure 7, expansions occur when the number of keys 𝑁 reaches 4, 16, and 64. These thresholds cause the number of counters in each array to grow as √𝑁 . As a consequence, we achieve a sublinear memory footprint and sublinear errors. To see why, recall from Section 2 that a CMS al-located with arrays of 𝑤 counters has an expected error of 𝑁 /𝑤 . We prove in Theorem 4.1 that, by making 𝑤 grow as √𝑁 , Sublime CMS 

instead attains an expected error of 𝑂 (𝑁 /√𝑁 ) = 𝑂 (√𝑁 ) even when the stream’s length is unknown. Although keys inserted when the sketch was smaller contribute disproportionally to the error due to their counts duplicating with expansions, they are exponentially fewer in number. This property allows us to show that, collectively, such keys only increase the error by a small constant factor. In  

> 9It also grants Sublime CMS mergeability: the ability to merge sketches constructed on distinct streams to represent their union without needing to rescan them.

9 1 8 2

1) Earlier Sketch Before Expansion 

8 1 4 1 8 3 7 2

2) Current Sketch Before Contraction 

− 9 1 8 2 9 1 8 2

−1 0 −4 −1 −1 2 −1 0 Deltas 

+ −1 0 −4 −1

+ −1 2 −1 0

7 3 3 1

3) Current Sketch After Contraction 

Figure 8: During contractions, Sublime CMS extracts the recent updates by subtracting the previous sketch. It adds the results to the previous sketch to transfer the updates. 

sum, compared to a standard CMS with linear errors and a fixed memory footprint, Sublime CMS achieves significantly lower errors at a slightly higher space cost. As such, it is a better fit for appli-cations that require maintaining low errors as the stream grows indefinitely. 

Deletions and Contractions. Sublime CMS handles deletions us-ing the same procedure as CMS, though it eventually contracts after many deletions to save memory. The simplest way to contract is to revert an expansion by folding the halves of each array onto each other and adding up the counters. Yet, this approach would inflate the error since it adds the counters copied during the last expan-sion to the originals, thereby doubling them. Instead, Sublime CMS 

keeps a record of the sketch’s state just before each expansion. It extracts the recent updates made to the current sketch by subtract-ing the state of the sketch before the last expansion from its left and right halves. We illustrate this for a single array in Figure 8. The result is an array of deltas indicating how each counter from the earlier sketch and its copy have changed. Sublime CMS applies these deltas to the original counters in the earlier sketch. Finally, it discards the current sketch and uses the earlier sketch to handle future operations. The contraction threshold is set to the average of the two previ-ous expansion thresholds to avoid the problem of updates frequently resizing the sketch. As such, a contraction is triggered when the majority of the stream’s keys are deleted. Therefore, Sublime CMS 

always handles most of the stream using arrays that are at most twice as large as √𝑁 . Thus, the expected error and the size of each array remain the same as before, despite the state of the sketch depending on the sequence of insertions and deletions. Maintaining the sketch record increases the memory footprint by at most a factor of 2. When the total key count fluctuates, the memory saved by contracting outweighs this cost. 

Rich Space of Tradeoffs. By varying the expansion thresh-olds, we expose a rich spectrum of accuracy-memory tradeoffs. We encode these policies using a Size Function , denoted as 𝑊 (𝑁 ),which captures the growth rate of the number of counters in each array with respect to 𝑁 . The faster the size function grows with re-spect to 𝑁 , the sooner Sublime CMS expands, thereby tracking more of the stream’s keys accurately in exchange for a larger memory footprint. By default, the size function is set to 𝑊 (𝑁 ) = √𝑁 . We generalize it to a Sub-Linear Power of the form 𝑊 (𝑁 ) = 𝑁 𝛼 /𝜖 , with constants 𝛼 ∈ [0 , 1) and 𝜖 > 0. This corresponds to having 1/𝜖 

chunks in each array at the beginning and expanding when 𝑁 

grows by a factor of 21/𝛼 , which is larger than two. Such a factor Accepted to SIGMOD 2026 

Sublime: Sublinear Error & Space for Unbounded Skewed Streams SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India 

Insert 𝑥 

ℎ1(𝑥 ), +𝜎 1(𝑥 )

ℎ2(𝑥 ), +𝜎 2(𝑥 )

ℎ3(𝑥 ), +𝜎 3(𝑥 )

Query 𝑞 

Result = 2 

> Median

ℎ1(𝑞 ), ×𝜎 1(𝑞 ) = −1

ℎ2(𝑞 ), ×𝜎 2(𝑞 ) = 1 

ℎ3(𝑞 ), ×𝜎 3(𝑞 ) = 1 

−2

9

−4

Figure 9: CS assigns a random update direction to each key and uses it to insert them into 𝑑 counter arrays of size 𝑤 . The random update directions enable unbiased estimation. 

amortizes the cost of both expansions and contractions down to a constant, as they copy 𝑑 · 𝑊 (𝑁 ) ≤ 𝑂 (𝑁 ) counters. In Section B, we show that, when using a sublinear power size function, Sublime CMS achieves an expected error of 𝑂 (𝑁 /𝑊 (𝑁 )) = 

𝑂 (𝜖 · 𝑁 1−𝛼 ). Compared to the expected error of a fixed-size CMS allocated upfront with arrays of 𝑊 (𝑁 ) counters, which is known to be the best error bound achievable using 𝑊 (𝑁 ) counters [ 20 ], this error is only larger by a small constant factor 10 . In a similar way, one may hope to achieve a constant expected error by setting the number of counters to grow linearly with the data size, i.e., 

𝑊 (𝑁 ) = 𝑁 /𝜖 . Yet, we prove in Section 5 that, without knowing the ultimate length of the stream, the best expected error achievable by a sketch that maintains 𝑁 /𝜖 counters per array 11 is Ω( 𝜖 · log 𝑁 ).We prove that Sublime CMS achieves this error bound in this setting as well, thereby demonstrating its space-optimality. The following theorem, proven in Section B.1, formalizes the aforementioned expected error guarantees for Sublime CMS : 12 

Theorem 4.1. When using a size function 𝑊 (·) and a single array on a stream with a total key count of 𝑁 , Sublime CMS provides an estimation error 𝐸 (𝑁 ) satisfying 

E [𝐸 (𝑁 )] ≤ 

(

𝑂 (1) · 𝜖𝑁 1−𝛼 if 𝑊 (𝑁 ) = 𝑁 𝛼 /𝜖 , for 𝛼 ∈ [0 , 1) ,

log 2 𝑁 · 𝜖 if 𝑊 (𝑁 ) = 𝑁 /𝜖 .Compared to a fixed-size CMS allocated upfront with an array of 𝑊 (𝑁 )

counters with knowledge of 𝑁 , the expected error terms above are higher by at most a constant and a logarithmic factor. 

Applying Markov’s inequality to the expected error bounds above yields the same confidence bounds as CMS. Moreover, through a similar analysis to that of CMS, one can show that employing 𝑑 in-dependent arrays in Sublime CMS improves confidence exponentially. These confidence bounds remain stable as the stream grows. 13 

> 10

The constant factor in question is (2 1/𝛼 − 1) · 1−2(𝛼 −1) ·log 2 𝑁    

> 21/𝛼 −1−1

, which is at most 21/𝛼 −121/𝛼 −1 −1 and converges to log 2 𝑁 as 𝛼 tends to 1. 

> 11

More precisely, we show this for any sketch using 𝑂 



𝑁 /𝜖 · log log 𝑁  

> log 𝑁



bits of space. 

> 12

We also we show that similar bounds hold for Sublime when it is applied to Misra-Gries. 

> 13

One can also expand the number of arrays to improve confidence over time. We omit this from our exposition due to its similarity to the approach of expanding the number of counters in each array. 

Sketch Bias Error Bound Confidence Insert Delete Query 

CMS Over 𝑒𝑁 𝑤 1 − 𝑒 −𝑑 𝑂 (𝑑 ) 𝑂 (𝑑 ) 𝑂 (𝑑 )

CS Unbiased 𝑒 ·√︂    

> P𝑦 (𝑓 (𝑦 )) 2
> 𝑤

≥ 1 − 𝑒 −𝑑 𝑂 (𝑑 ) 𝑂 (𝑑 ) 𝑂 (𝑑 )

Table 2: CMS and CS strike different tradeoffs. 

4.3 Applying Sublime to Count Sketch 

We now apply Sublime to Count Sketch to derive Sublime CS .

Count Sketch (CS). Recall from Section 1 that unbiased esti-mates equal the ground-truth frequency on average. This allows for multiplying estimates, as required in join size [ 34 , 37 , 38 ] and covariance [ 24 ] estimation, without the risk of compounding er-rors. CS provides such unbiased estimates and reaps its benefits. 14 

Table 2 summarizes the properties of CS and compares it to CMS. Similarly to CMS, the core component of CS is a counter array of size 𝑤 coupled with a hash function ℎ that maps each key to a counter. Unlike CMS, CS further associates each key with a random “update direction” from the set {− 1, +1 } by hashing it with another hash function 𝜎 . It inserts a new key 𝑥 by incrementing or decre-menting its counter according to 𝜎 (𝑥 ), as shown in Figure 9. CS deletes 𝑥 by subtracting 𝜎 (𝑥 ) from its counter to undo its insertion. Since each key’s update direction is random, the expected interfer-ence on 𝑥 ’s counter from any other key is zero due to the positive and negative possibilities cancelling out. Thus, the value of the counter along the update direction is an estimate of 𝑥 ’s frequency. The zero expected interference removes bias, though it introduces two-sided errors (both under and overestimations). Although the estimates are unbiased and accurate in expectation for any workload, they may suffer from large deviations. This is because many keys hashing to the same counter may have the same update direction, despite the zero expected interference. Skew exac-erbates this phenomenon since a heavy hitter drastically changes the estimates of the keys hashing to the same counter, no matter its update direction. Therefore, to bound the probability of severe er-rors, we compute the estimation variance. 15 Denoting the frequency of key 𝑦 by 𝑓 (𝑦 ), this variance can be expressed as 𝑉 =   

> P𝑦 (𝑓 (𝑦 )) 2
> 𝑤

. This lines up with the intuition that larger arrays make hash collisions less likely, reducing the variance. A straight-forward application of Chebyshev’s inequality shows that the error does not exceed 𝑒 · √𝑉 

with a confidence of at least 1 − 𝑒 −2.16 

Similarly to CMS, CS boosts confidence by employing 𝑑 indepen-dent arrays, each with its own hash functions ℎ𝑖 and 𝜎 𝑖 . It answers a query by returning the median estimate, as shown in Figure 9. The median is returned, as it only has large errors when most estimates err significantly, which becomes exponentially less likely given 

> 14

One can also achieve unbiased estimation using CMS by, in each array, subtracting the average of the counter values a query key does not hash to from its counter [ 27 ]. Yet, the resulting estimate has a slightly higher variance than that of CS. 

> 15

CS uses 4-wise independent hash functions 𝜎 to bound the variance and the proba-bility of large errors [13]. 

> 16

CS’s error bound is √𝑉 = 𝑂 (√𝑁 /𝑤 ) when the workload is more uniform due to the squared summands being small. This bound is smaller than CMS’s error, i.e., 𝑁 /𝑤 .Accepted to SIGMOD 2026  

> SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India Navid Eslami, Ioana O. Bercea, Rasmus Pagh, and Niv Dayan

more arrays. Formally, by a Chernoff bound, CS guarantees an error bound of at most 𝑒 · √𝑉 with a confidence of at least 1 − 𝑒 −𝑑 .17 

Accommodating Skew. To avoid the space wastage of uniformly-sized counters, Sublime CS applies VALE to CS. It stores the absolute value of each counter using VALE as before, while representing the sign of each counter by appending a sign bit to its stub. 

Accommodating Unbounded Growth. Since the estimation variance 𝑉 determines CS’s error bound, Sublime CS controls the error by expanding based on the growth of the variance. That is, it expands its number of counters, i.e., the denominator 𝑤 of the variance, to balance out the numerator 𝐹 = P𝑦 (𝑓 (𝑦 )) 2. This translates to expanding when the numerator 𝐹 more than doubles, which is in contrast with how Sublime CMS expands when 𝑁 (the numerator of CMS’s error bound) more than doubles. We encode different expansion policies by defining the size function based on the numerator 𝐹 , i.e., as 𝑊 (𝐹 ). The quantity 𝐹 is also known as the squared ℓ2-norm of the stream. In Section B.2, we prove through a similar analysis to that of Sublime CMS , the following variance bounds for Sublime CS :

Theorem 4.2. When using a size function 𝑊 (·) and a single array on a stream with a squared ℓ2-norm of 𝐹 = P𝑦 𝑓 (𝑦 )2, Sublime CS 

provides unbiased estimates with a variance 𝑉 (𝐹 ) satisfying 

𝑉 (𝐹 ) ≤

(

𝑂 (1) · 𝜖𝐹 1−𝛼 if 𝑊 (𝐹 ) = 𝐹 𝛼 /𝜖 , for 𝛼 ∈ [0 , 1) ,

log 2 𝐹 · 𝜖 if 𝑊 (𝐹 ) = 𝐹 /𝜖 .Compared to a fixed-size CS allocated upfront with an array of 𝑊 (𝑁 )

counters with knowledge of 𝐹 , the variance terms above are higher by at most a constant and a logarithmic 18 factor. 

As in the case of Sublime CMS , applying Chebyshev’s inequal-ity and employing 𝑑 independent arrays yields stable confidence bounds that match those of CS. Sublime CS maps keys to consistent counters and update direc-tions by employing the same hash functions ℎ1, . . . , ℎ 𝑑 and 𝜎 1, . . . , 𝜎 𝑑 

across expansions. It handles insertions, deletions, and queries as in the case of a standard CS. Using the same strategy as above, one can adapt Sublime to an arbitrary sketch with an error bound of the form 𝑋 𝑤 , where 𝑋 is some parameter of the workload or the sketch (e.g., the total number of keys) and 𝑤 is the sketch’s size (e.g., the number of counters). This entails expanding when the quantity 𝑋 more than doubles and defining the size function based on 𝑋 , i.e., as 𝑊 (𝑋 ).

Tracking the Squared ℓ2-norm 𝐹 . Similarly to Sublime CMS ,where we have to track the total number of keys 𝑁 to determine when to expand, Sublime CS must track the squared ℓ2-norm 𝐹 . Yet, one cannot simply increment a value with each insertion to track 𝐹 .This is because, due to the squared summands, inserting a frequent key grows 𝐹 more than inserting an infrequent key. While it is pos-sible to use the counter arrays within Sublime CS itself to estimate 𝐹 ,the resulting estimate has a confidence that is determined by the number of arrays 𝑑 . For very long streams, this estimate eventually errs significantly, leading to mistimed expansions and contractions that adversely affect the accuracy and the memory footprint. We                    

> 17 The precise confidence given by the Chernoff bound is 1−𝑒 −(𝑒 4/8) ·𝑑 , which is higher than the text’s simplified expression.
> 18 This logarithmic term can be bounded in terms of the total key count 𝑁 , as 𝐹 ≤𝑁 2
> and thus log 2𝐹 ≤2·log 2𝑁 .

would like to have an estimate of the squared ℓ2-norm 𝐹 with very high confidence to support the entire stream. To this end, we employ AMS sketches, which are sketches tai-lored to approximating the ℓ2-norm of the stream [ 3 ]. Each AMS sketch is a single counter that is updated with random update direc-tions derived by hashing the stream’s keys, similarly to CS. Squaring the value of the counter yields an estimate of 𝐹 . It is known that by employing 4 · log 2 𝑁 AMS sketches, one can estimate 𝐹 within a factor of 2 with a high confidence of 1 − 1/𝑁 [3], which allows for supporting the entire stream. Since 𝑁 is at most the maximum value representable in a 64-bit machine word in practice, Sublime CS em-ploys 64 AMS sketches to track 𝐹 . It uses SIMD to quickly update 19 

and query these sketches after each insertion or deletion. 

5 MEMORY ANALYSIS 

We quantify Sublime’s memory consumption (Theorem 5.2). We show that it gives rise to space-optimal frequency estimation sketches by proving a memory footprint lower bound for sketches that pro-cess a growing stream without knowledge of its ultimate length (Theorems 5.3 and 5.4). 

Memory Consumption. As described in Section 4.1, Sublime adaptively tunes VALE to reclaim memory and ensure that a small fraction of its bits are unused at any time. This implies that the memory footprint is dominated by the space occupied by the stubs and the extensions. We quantify this cost for a single counter based on its count as: 

Lemma 5.1. When working with unsigned counters and stubs of length 𝑠 , VALE encodes a counter value 𝑣 in 𝑠 bits if 𝑣 < 2𝑠 and in at most 4 + 1 .26 · log 2 𝑣 bits otherwise. Signed counters use one more bit for encoding the sign in both cases. 

Proof. If 𝑣 < 2𝑠 , it fits in its stub and occupies 𝑠 bits. Otherwise, its 𝑠 lower-order bits are stored in its stub and its higher-order bits encoding ⌊𝑣 /2𝑠 ⌋ are stored in an extension. This extension has ⌊log 3 ⌊𝑣 /2𝑠 ⌋⌋ + 2 fragments to represent the digits and the de-limiter. Thus, it occupies 

2 · (⌊log 3 ⌊𝑣 /2𝑠 ⌋⌋ +2) ≤ 2 · (log 3 2 · log 2 ⌊𝑣 /2𝑠 ⌋ +2) ≤ 4−𝑠 +1 .26 · log 2 𝑣 

bits. This, combined with the cost of the stub, yields the result. □

Applying Lemma 5.1 to all counters within an array yields: 

Theorem 5.2. VALE encodes an array of 𝑤 counters with absolute values summing to 𝑘 in at most ≈ 𝑤 · max (𝑠, 4 + 1 .26 · log 2(𝑘 /𝑤 )) bits of memory. Applied to all 𝑑 arrays in Sublime CMS , this translates to a memory footprint of ≈ 𝑑 ·𝑊 (𝑁 ) · max (𝑠, 4 + 1 .26 · log 2 𝑁 /𝑊 (𝑁 )) bits when the size function 𝑊 (𝑁 ) is sublinear and ≈ 𝑑 · 𝑊 (𝑁 ) · max (𝑠, 4 + 1.26 · log 2(𝑁 log 2 𝑁 /𝑊 (𝑁 ))) bits when it is linear. The same bounds hold for Sublime CS with 𝑊 (𝐹 ) instead of 𝑊 (𝑁 ) and with an additive overhead of one bit per counter. 

Proof. Denoting the signed value of the 𝑖 -th counter by 𝑣 𝑖 and applying Lemma 5.1, the array occupies 𝑚 = P𝑖 𝑂 (1 + log 2 |𝑣 𝑖 |) = 

𝑂  𝑤 + P𝑖 log 2 |𝑣 𝑖 | bits. Due to the concavity of the logarithm,                              

> 19 More generally, it is possible to maintain 𝑘 AMS sketches, where 𝑘 is the machine word size, in constant time with high probability to approximate 𝐹 . Since 𝑘 = Ω( log 𝑛 )
> is standard in both theory and practice, it is possible to maintain a high confidence estimate of 𝐹 in constant time without the use of SIMD. We omit the corresponding algorithm and its proof of correctness due to space constraints. Accepted to SIGMOD 2026
> Sublime: Sublinear Error & Space for Unbounded Skewed Streams SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India 010 1
> 10 2
> AAE
> KOSARAK
> 010 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4WEB DOCS
> 010 1
> 10 2
> 10 3CAIDA
> Sublime CMS
> Sublime CMS (Prob. Inc.) CMS Stingy CMS
> Coding CMS
> Tailored SALSA Waving
> 25 50 75 Insert Latency [ns]
> 50 100
> 50 100 150
> 10 7
> 10 8
> 10 7
> 10 8
> 10 7
> 10 8
> 1/32 1/16 1/8 1/4 1/2 1Memory [MB] 50 100 Query Latency [ns]
> 1/8 1/4 1/2 124Memory [MB] 50 100
> 1/8 1/4 1/2 124Memory [MB] 50 100

Memory [MB] Kosarak WebDocs CAIDA 

𝑐 𝑠 𝑐 𝑠 𝑐 𝑠 

1/32 39 10 - - - -1/16 42 9 - - - -1/8 43 7 33 12 39 10 1/4 68 5 34 12 42 91/2 75 5 39 10 45 81 81 4 38 10 51 72 - - 50 7 64 54 - - 70 5 75 4

Table 3: Tuning VALE’s parameters for each plot point to the left according to the table above enables high perfor-mance and accuracy for Sublime CMS .Figure 10: Sublime CMS achieves the highest accuracy under real-world workloads while maintaining equal or superior insertion and query performance. We use the optimal tuning of the baselines at each point of the curves. The table on the right details the number of counters per chunk 𝑐 and the stub length 𝑠 used by Sublime CMS in each point. 

it must be that P𝑖 log 2 |𝑣 𝑖 |≤ 𝑤 · log 2(1 /𝑤 · P𝑖 |𝑣 𝑖 |). Because the logarithm is an increasing function and P𝑖 |𝑣 𝑖 | ≤ 𝑘 , it must be that 𝑤 · log 2(1 /𝑤 · P𝑖 |𝑣 𝑖 |) ≤ 𝑤 · log 2(𝑘 /𝑤 ). Plugging this into the first expression in the proof yields 𝑚 ≤ 𝑂 (𝑤 · (log 2(𝑘 /𝑤 ) + 1)) .By a similar analysis to that of Theorem 4.1, one can show that the number of increments 𝑘 made to each array in Sublime (account-ing for the copied counters) when using a sublinear power as the size function is 𝑂 (𝑁 ). Similarly, one can show that 𝑘 = 𝑂 (𝑁 log 𝑁 )

when the size function is linear. Plugging these values into the formula above and multiplying by the number of arrays 𝑑 proves the result. □

Memory Footprint Lower Bound. To prove a memory foot-print lower bound for frequency estimation sketches, we use them to implement filters and leverage their memory lower bounds. A filter is a compact data structure that answers whether a query key exists in a given set of keys. A filter never returns a false neg-ative, but it may return a false positive with a probability called the False Positive Rate (FPR) . The lower the desired FPR is, i.e., the higher the target accuracy level, the larger the filter’s memory footprint must be. It is known that a filter that supports a set of a growing size of 𝑛 

with an FPR of 𝛿 must use at least 𝑛 · [Ω( log 1/𝛿 + log log 𝑛 ) − Θ(1)] 

bits of memory at some point in time [ 58 ]. Therefore, a frequency estimation sketch that can be used to implement such a filter must also use at least this much memory. To begin with, consider a frequency estimation sketch with only overestimation errors (e.g., CMS). Suppose this sketch guarantees an error of at most 𝐸 (𝑁 )

and a confidence of 1 − 𝛿 for streams of length 𝑁 . One can use this sketch to implement a filter with an FPR of 𝛿 over a set of size 𝑛 = 𝑁 /(𝐸 (𝑁 ) + 1) by inserting each key in the set 𝐸 (𝑁 ) + 1 times. Filtering proceeds by checking if the frequency of a given key is at least 𝐸 (𝑁 ) + 1 , returning a positive if it is and a negative otherwise. Querying a key within the set returns an estimate that is always at least as large as 𝐸 (𝑁 ) + 1 (i.e., a true positive) while querying a key outside of the set only yields an estimate of 𝐸 (𝑁 ) + 1 and above (i.e., a false positive) with a probability of at most 𝛿 . The following theorem formalizes these intuitions: 

Theorem 5.3. Consider a frequency estimation sketch with only overestimation errors that processes growing streams with an error bound of 𝐸 (𝑁 ) and a confidence of 1 − 𝛿 . Such a sketch must use at least 𝑁 /𝐸 (𝑁 )·[Ω (log 1 /𝛿 + log log( 𝑁 /𝐸 (𝑁 )) ) − Θ(1)] bits of memory at some point in time while processing a stream. 

It is unknown whether it is possible to implement a filter with a sketch that has two-sided errors, since underestimations may introduce false negatives. Nevertheless, we prove in Section C that if the estimates of such a sketch have a variance that yields an error bound of 𝐸 (𝑁 ) with a confidence of 1 − 𝛿 (similarly to CS), the same lower bound holds: 

Theorem 5.4. Consider a frequency estimation sketch providing estimates with an expected absolute error of 𝐸 (𝑁 ) and a variance of 𝛿 · (𝐸 (𝑁 )) 2 for any key when processing a stream of size 𝑁 . Such a sketch must use at least 𝑁 /𝐸 (𝑁 )·[Ω( log 1/𝛿 + log log (𝑁 /𝐸 (𝑁 ))) −Θ(1)] 

bits of memory at some point in time while processing a stream. 

One can verify from Theorem 5.2 that, when fixing the confi-dence using a constant number of arrays 𝑑 while using a sublinear power (resp. linear) size function 𝑊 (𝑁 ) to achieve an error bound of 𝐸 (𝑁 ), Sublime uses a memory of 𝑂 (𝑁 /𝐸 (𝑁 ) · log (𝑁 /𝐸 (𝑁 ))) (resp. Accepted to SIGMOD 2026  

> SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India Navid Eslami, Ioana O. Bercea, Rasmus Pagh, and Niv Dayan

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.8 1.6 3.2 ZIPFIAN Exponent 10 −2

10 −1

10 0

10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> AAE

Memory=1MB 

> Sublime CMS
> CMS Stingy CMS
> Tailored SALSA Waving Adaptive Fixed

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.8 1.6 3.2 ZIPFIAN Exponent 12345Memory [MB] 

A) B) 

Figure 11: By adapting VALE to skew, Sublime CMS achieves the highest accuracy among all baselines (Part A) and a smaller memory footprint compared to using a fixed tun-ing (Part B). 

𝑂 (𝑁 /𝐸 (𝑁 ) · log 𝑁 · log log 𝑁 )) bits. This almost matches the mem-ory lower bound of Theorem 5.4 with a slight difference in the logarithmic terms. One can extend Sublime to match these lower bounds by compressing the counter arrays via coarsely quantizing their counters and applying run-length encoding. These compres-sion techniques may compromise update and query performance, though we expect to be able to resolve this degradation using tech-niques based on rank and select [17, 44, 57, 60, 81]. 

6 EVALUATION 

We now turn to empirically evaluate Sublime. Experiments 1, 2, 3, and 6 focus on accommodating skew, while Experiments 4, 5, and 7 deal with unbounded data growth. Experiments 1-5 all em-ploy Sublime CMS . Experiments 6 and 7 showcase Sublime CS . Exper-iment 8 applies both variants of Sublime to join size estimation. 

Platform. We run the experiments on a Fedora 41 machine with an Intel Xeon w7-2495X processor (4.8 GHz) with 24 cores. Our machine features an 80 KB L1 cache and a 2 MB L2 cache for each core, a 45 MB shared L3 cache, and 64 GB of RAM. 

Baselines. We compare Sublime CMS to a traditional CMS, as well as the variants described in Section 3 that cater to skew. We use SALSA [ 6] to represent counter merging methods and Waving sketch [ 47 ] to represent hybrid methods, as they are the most accu-rate and the fastest in their category. For counter sharing methods, we employ the following three baselines: Stingy sketch [46] is the state of the art in terms of throughput since it implements the clas-sic counter sharing design with a hierarchy of shared byte-aligned counters that prefetches the counters, as described in Section 3. Coding sketch [ 15 ] is the most accurate counter sharing method that compresses its hierarchy of counters, trading performance for memory. Tailored sketch [ 31 ] is the most space-efficient (and thus accurate) counter sharing method, as it probabilistically increments each counter in the classic hierarchy, thereby shortening the coun-ters’ length in exchange for introducing two-sided errors. Among these six baselines, only Coding sketch is tunable, though its tuning is manual and complex. This is because its compression algorithm obscures the level of skew in the workload to which the tuning should be adapted. We implement Sublime in C++ and use the open-source C++ implementations of the baselines. The aforementioned 10 7 10 8

No. of Keys 10 1

10 2

10 3

10 4

10 5

> AAE
> 0.5 0.75 1.0
> Sublime CMS
> CMS Stingy CMS
> Tailored SALSA Waving

10 7 10 8

No. of Keys 10 −4

10 −3

10 −2

10 −1

10 0

> Memory [B/Key]
> 0.5 0.75 1.0

Figure 12: Sublime CMS achieves both a low error rate and a small memory footprint when processing growing streams. 10 6 10 3 10 0

No. of Keys 10 −1

10 0

10 1 

> AAE
> Sublime CMS CMS

10 6 10 3 10 0

No. of Keys 024Memory [MB] 

Figure 13: Sublime CMS saves a significant amount of memory by contracting when many keys are deleted. 

implementations are all single-threaded. We construct all sketches with 𝑑 = 3 arrays. This parameter setting is common in practice since it yields a confidence bound of ≈ 95% , which is significantly higher than the confidence bounds resulting from 𝑑 = 1 (≈ 63% )and 𝑑 = 2 (≈ 86% ) while being comparable to 𝑑 = 4 (≈ 98% ). 

Datasets and Workloads. Following prior work [ 4 , 6 , 14 , 27 ,28 , 30 , 31 , 46 , 47 , 50 – 52 , 55 , 63 , 65 , 67 , 73 , 75 – 79 ], we compare the baselines in a single-threaded setting by employing three real-world streams: 

• Kosarak : 8M clicks from a news portal [ 10 ], anonymized as 8-byte integers. This dataset is highly skewed, resembling a 

Zipfian distribution with an exponent parameter of ≈ 3.5.

• WebDocs : 300M words extracted from 1.7M online English documents [ 53 ]. Each word in this dataset is encoded as an 8-byte integer. This dataset follows a skewed distribution with a Zipfian exponent of ≈ 1.0.

• CAIDA : 27M anonymized 5-tuples describing the network connection of packets from 10 traces taken from backbone Internet links in 2018 [ 1 ]. Each 5-tuple is represented as a 13-byte string. This dataset has a Zipfian exponent of ≈ 2.0.We evaluate the accuracy of each baseline by querying it with each distinct key in the stream and compute the Average Absolute Error (AAE) of the estimates from the ground-truth. We focus on absolute errors rather than relative errors to keep our presentation consistent with the theoretical error bounds studied in the literature. We have found the relative errors to behave similarly to the absolute errors. 

Experiment 1: Accuracy and Speed vs. Memory. In Figure 10, we feed each workload to each baseline while varying the allotted Accepted to SIGMOD 2026                     

> Sublime: Sublinear Error & Space for Unbounded Skewed Streams SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India 1/8 1/4 1/2 124Memory [MB] 010 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> AAE
> Sublime CS CS Stingy CS Coding CS Waving
> 1/8 1/4 1/2 124Memory [MB] 050 100 150 Insert Latency [ns]
> 1/8 1/4 1/2 124Memory [MB] 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4
> 10 5
> 10 6
> 10 7
> Query Latency [ns]

Memory [MB] 𝑐 𝑠 

1/8 39 10 1/4 42 91/2 45 81 51 72 64 54 75 4

Table 4: Tuning VALE as above leads to high performance and accuracy. Figure 14: Sublime CS has the lowest errors and fastest insertions compared to all other unbiased baselines. The table to the right presents the tuning of VALE’s parameters, i.e., the number of counters per chunk 𝑐 and the stub length 𝑠 .

memory budget. This experiment features bounded data growth, allowing us to focus on how well each baseline accommodates skew. Each point on the curves represents a complete run of the experi-ment starting from scratch. We tune Coding sketch and Sublime CMS 

at each point to minimize their error and showcase their highest accuracy. The table to the right of Figure 10 details the tuned pa-rameters of Sublime CMS —the number of counters per chunk 𝑐 and the stub length 𝑠 . We increase the memory budget by factors of 2 on the 𝑥 -axis up to 4 MBs, though for the Kosarak dataset, we use smaller budgets due to the workload trace being shorter. Figure 10 shows that Sublime CMS has a lower estimation error than most other baselines by as much as an order of magnitude while providing similar or superior insertion and query perfor-mance. This is because it extends overflowing counters without affecting other counter values. Compared to the baseline with the closest errors, i.e., SALSA, Sublime CMS has lower errors by 40% across the board while providing faster insertions and queries by as much as 3× and 2.4×. This performance improvement is due to Sublime CMS ’s use of rank and select primitives, as well as Optimiza-tions 1 to 6 described in Section 4.1. Coding sketch exhibits slower insertion and query performance by 2 and 7 orders of magnitude compared to the other baselines due to its decompression overheads. As such, we henceforth exclude it from the experiments that evalu-ate Sublime CMS . When the memory budget is low under the CAIDA 

dataset, Tailored sketch is more accurate than Sublime CMS due to its probabilistic incrementation strategy enabling it to store shorter counters in exchange for introducing underestimations. Applying the same technique to Sublime CMS yields lower errors than Tailored sketch by 2.38 ×, as shown by the dotted curve. 

Experiment 2: Accuracy under Varying Levels of Skew. 

Figure 11-A) compares the estimation errors of the baselines under the same memory budget as the amount of skew in the data varies. Here, we generate streams of 100M keys from a Zipfian distribution over 100K distinct keys. We vary the exponent parameter, i.e., the skewness, on the 𝑥 -axis from 0.0 to 3.2, which correspond to a uniform and a highly skewed dataset, respectively. Recall that, aside from Coding sketch (which we exclude from the experiment due to its poor performance), Sublime CMS is the only tunable sketch. Thus, we allow it to adapt VALE’s tuning to the workload’s skew. Figure 11-A) shows that Sublime CMS provides the lowest error under all degrees of skew. It outperforms all other baselines by an order of magnitude for more uniform workloads and by 3× for more skewed workloads. This is because it exposes a tuning space 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 ZIPFIAN Exponent 246P-99 Absolute Error 

> No. of Keys Variance

0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 ZIPFIAN Exponent 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 Memory [MB] 

Figure 15: By expanding based on the estimation variance, Sublime CS maintains a stable confidence bound. 

that allows VALE to save memory by employing longer and shorter stubs for more uniform and skewed workloads, respectively. 

Experiment 3: Memory Savings of Adaptively Tuning VALE. 

We demonstrate the need for adapting VALE’s tuning as the stream grows by comparing Sublime CMS ’s memory footprint when using a fixed tuning to when it adapts the tuning. We employ a total of 1M counters for both versions and use 𝑐 = 64 counters per chunk and stubs of length 𝑠 = 6 bits for the fixed tuning version. Figure 11-B) considers the Zipfian workloads from Experiment 2 and varies the skew on the 𝑥 -axis. As shown, adaptively tuning VALE bounds the number of allocated tails arrays and improves the memory footprint over using a fixed tuning by as much as 5×. With enough skew, the average extension length decreases, and the fixed tuning version of Sublime CMS avoids allocating many tails arrays. Nevertheless, it does not optimally leverage the shorter extension lengths and consumes ≈ 10% more memory than the adaptive version. In this experiment, adaptations comprise less than 3% of the processing time, as their overhead is amortized. One can expect this overhead in mixed workloads with both insertions and deletions to be similar to our insertion-only workload. This is because our workload triggers just as many adaptations as mixed workloads by growing the counters and causing many chunks to overflow. 

Experiment 4: Accuracy and Memory under Data Growth. 

We now compare the accuracy and memory footprint of the base-lines when the stream grows indefinitely. Here, we allocate each baseline an initial memory footprint of 32KB and insert the Web-Docs dataset. Figure 12 measures, for each baseline, its error and the ratio of its memory footprint to the stream’s length. We use the default configuration for Sublime CMS , which has a sublinear power size function of the form 𝑊 (𝑁 ) = 𝑁 𝛼 /𝜖 with 𝛼 = 0 .5 and 

𝜖 = 1 , as introduced in Section 4.2. We also compare versions of Accepted to SIGMOD 2026               

> SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India Navid Eslami, Ioana O. Bercea, Rasmus Pagh, and Niv Dayan 050M 100M 150M No. of Rows 010 1
> 10 2
> lineitem  AAE  CMS CS Sublime CMS (Fixed Size) Sublime CS (Fixed Size) Sublime CMS (Expand) Sublime CS (Expand)
> 050M 100M 150M No. of Rows 010 1
> 10 2
> orders  AAE
> 050M 100M 150M No. of Rows 10 1
> 10 2
> 10 3
> 10 4
> 10 5
> Join AAE

Figure 16: Sublime provides the most accurate frequency estimates of table entries and the size of their join. 

Sublime CMS with the exponent 𝛼 of the size function set to 0.75 

and 1.0. Figure 12 differentiates these versions by annotating each curve with the value of 𝛼 used. Figure 12 shows that Sublime CMS is the only sketch to exhibit sublinearly scaling estimation errors. It achieves this by expanding its number of counters along with the stream. This culminates in the three versions of Sublime CMS (with exponents 𝛼 of 0.5, 0.75 ,and 1.0) improving the error over the best baseline by one, two, and three orders of magnitude. The right subfigure in Figure 12 shows that, despite expanding the number of counters, Sublime CMS main-tains a modest memory footprint relative to the stream’s length. Furthermore, we have found that expansions take up only 0.5% of the processing time, as they simply copy the counters sequentially. 

Experiment 5: Contractions. Figure 13 showcases deletions and contractions in Sublime CMS . Here, we insert the CAIDA dataset and subsequently delete keys in a random order while measuring the error and the memory footprint. We only compare Sublime CMS 

to CMS since all other baselines do not provide a deletion API. As shown, Sublime CMS maintains lower errors than a CMS of the same size by as much as two orders of magnitude. This is because VALE encodes the counter values in less space, allowing the storage of more counters. As keys are deleted, Sublime CMS contracts to save memory, while CMS wastes memory by remaining at the same size. This enables achieving a lower memory footprint than CMS by 2-3 orders of magnitude while still being more accurate, despite the reduced number of counters slightly increasing the error. Moreover, since contractions sequentially scan the sketch, similarly to expansions, they take up at most 0.5% of the total execution time. 

Experiment 6: Unbiased Accuracy and Speed vs. Memory. 

We now turn to Sublime CS to demonstrate the applicability of Sub-lime beyond CMS. We compare it to a traditional CS and Waving sketch [ 47 ], which is representative of unbiased hybrid methods. We also compare to Stingy sketch [ 46 ] and Coding sketch [ 15 ] ap-plied to CS, representing counter sharing methods with unbiased estimates. We exclude SALSA [ 6] as its library does not provide a variant with unbiased estimates. We employ the CAIDA dataset and optimally tune Coding sketch and Sublime CS .Figure 14 shows that, by leveraging the memory savings of VALE to store more counters, Sublime CS achieves lower errors than the next best baseline by as much as an order of magnitude. It also has the fastest insertions while closely matching the query speed of the most performant sketch due to its use of Optimizations 1 to 6. 

Experiment 7: Expansion Based on Variance. Figure 15 il-lustrates how expanding Sublime CS based on the growth of the estimation variance (as described in Section 4.3) instead of the num-ber of keys enables a stable confidence bound. We demonstrate this improvement by inserting 100M keys with increasing levels of skew. We measure the P-99 absolute error of the estimates instead of the average, since it showcases the errors that exceed their confidence bounds, whereas averages obscure this information. We also report the sketch’s final memory footprint after ingesting the stream. As shown in Figure 15, expanding based on the estimation vari-ance ensures stable tail errors in exchange for a higher memory footprint. This is in contrast to expanding Sublime CS based on the number of keys, which yields tail errors that increase with skew. The reason is that a more skewed dataset grows the variance more quickly, necessitating more frequent expansions to maintain a stable confidence bound. As skew increases further, expanding based on the variance yields diminishing returns. This is due to the stream’s distinct keys dropping in number with skew, making keys less likely to map to the same counter and create severe errors. 

Experiment 8: Join Size Estimation. Figure 16 applies both Sublime CMS and Sublime CS to join size estimation. Here, we employ a 100 GB TPC-H workload [ 69 ]. We consider the lineitem and 

orders tables, incrementally insert rows into each, and periodically join them on their shared ORDERKEY column. Following [ 70 ], each row in the orders table is duplicated 1-3 times to simulate a many-to-many join. We construct sketches tracking the count of each 

ORDERKEY value in these tables and predict their counts in the join by multiplying the per-table estimates. We compare CMS and CS, as well as fixed-size and expandable versions of Sublime CMS and Sublime CS . We set the initial memory budget to 8MB ( ≈ 0.1% of the data size) and distribute it to each sketch in proportion to the initial size of its table. The expandable Sublime CMS and Sublime CS grow as a sublinear power (with a power of 0.75) of the tables. Figure 16 reports accuracy measurements for each table and the join result. As shown in Figure 16, Sublime attains higher accuracy than CMS and CS by multiple orders of magnitude due to their use of variable-length counters. Moreover, the expandable Sublime CMS 

and Sublime CS outperform their fixed-size counterparts by as much as an order of magnitude. The fixed-size version of Sublime CS is more accurate than the fixed-size version of Sublime CMS on each separate table. This is because the workload in this experiment is almost uniform, leading to the positive and negative counts of colliding keys in Sublime CS to cancel out. When allowed to expand, Sublime CMS is more accurate than Sublime CS on individual tables, as collisions reduce with expansions, and Sublime CMS does not store a sign bit for each counter. Nevertheless, both versions of Sublime CS 

have more accurate join estimates than the corresponding version of Sublime CMS . This is due to Sublime CS returning unbiased estimates, which allows for multiplying them without compounding errors. Accepted to SIGMOD 2026 

Sublime: Sublinear Error & Space for Unbounded Skewed Streams SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India 

7 CONCLUSION 

We introduced Sublime, the first framework for generalizing a fre-quency estimation sketch to adapt to the skew and length of the stream. We showed that Sublime improves the accuracy and mem-ory footprint of sketches beyond the state of the art while main-taining high performance. Although Sublime is currently single-threaded, we expect significant performance gains from paralleliza-tion (e.g., through employing thread-local sketches to ingest subsets of the stream and periodically merging them into a unified sketch for answering queries [ 40 , 62 ]). Studying the interplay of concur-rent updates with expansions, contractions, and adaptive tuning would be an interesting direction of future work. More broadly, Sublime opens a new research avenue on expandable sketches ap-plicable to other core statistics, such as quantiles and cardinalities, which exhibit similar error growth under workloads with growing datasets. This marks a fundamental shift from fixed-size sketches with degrading accuracy to adaptive structures that maintain stable accuracy for always-on analytics. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

We thank the reviewers for their insightful comments. This research was supported by the NSERC grant #RGPIN-2023-03580. 

REFERENCES 

[1] [n. d.]. Anonymized Internet Traces 2018. https://catalog.caida.org/dataset/ passive_2018_pcap. doi:dataset/passive_2018_pcap Dates used: 2025-10-11. Accessed: 2025-10-11.. [2] Charu C. Aggarwal. 2013. An Introduction to Sensor Data Analytics . Springer US, Boston, MA, 1–8. doi:10.1007/978-1-4614-6309-2_1 [3] Noga Alon, Yossi Matias, and Mario Szegedy. 1999. The space complexity of approximating the frequency moments. J. Comput. System Sci. 58, 1 (1999), 137–147. doi:10.1006/jcss.1998.1627 [4] Daniel Anderson, Pryce Bevan, Kevin Lang, Edo Liberty, Lee Rhodes, and Justin Thaler. 2017. A high-performance algorithm for identifying frequent items in data streams. In Proceedings of the 2017 Internet Measurement Conference (London, United Kingdom) (IMC ’17) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 268–282. doi:10.1145/3131365.3131407 [5] Jim Apple. 2022. Stretching your data with taffy filters. Software: Practice and Experience (2022). [6] Ran Basat, Gil Einziger, Michael Mitzenmacher, and Shay Vargaftik. 2021. SALSA: Self-Adjusting Lean Streaming Analytics. 864–875. doi:10.1109/ICDE51399.2021. 00080 [7] Ran Ben Basat, Gil Einziger, Michael Mitzenmacher, and Shay Vargaftik. 2020. Faster and More Accurate Measurement through Additive-Error Counters. In 

IEEE INFOCOM 2020 - IEEE Conference on Computer Communications . 1251–1260. doi:10.1109/INFOCOM41043.2020.9155340 [8] Ran Ben Basat, Xiaoqi Chen, Gil Einziger, Roy Friedman, and Yaron Kassner. 2019. Randomized Admission Policy for Efficient Top-k, Frequency, and Volume Estimation. IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 27, 4 (Aug. 2019), 1432–1445. doi:10.1109/ TNET.2019.2918929 [9] Ran Ben Basat, Gil Einziger, Isaac Keslassy, Ariel Orda, Shay Vargaftik, and Erez Waisbard. 2022. Memento: Making Sliding Windows Efficient for Heavy Hitters. 

IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking 30, 4 (2022), 1440–1453. doi:10.1109/TNET. 2021.3132385 [10] Ferenc Bodon. 2012. Frequent Itemset Mining Dataset Repository, Kosarak. http://fimi.uantwerpen.be/data/ [11] F. Bostanci, Ismail Yüksel, Ataberk Olgun, Konstantinos Kanellopoulos, Yahya Tuğrul, Abdullah Giray Yaglikçi, Mohammad Sadrosadati, and Onur Mutlu. 2024. CoMeT: Count-Min-Sketch-based Row Tracking to Mitigate RowHammer at Low Cost. 593–612. doi:10.1109/HPCA57654.2024.00050 [12] Paris Carbone, Asterios Katsifodimos, Stephan Ewen, Volker Markl, Seif Haridi, and Kostas Tzoumas. 2015. Apache Flink ™: Stream and Batch Processing in a Single Engine. Bulletin of the IEEE Computer Society Technical Committee on Data Engineering 36, 4 (2015), 28–38. [13] Moses Charikar, Kevin Chen, and Martin Farach-Colton. 2004. Finding frequent items in data streams. Theoretical Computer Science 312, 1 (2004), 3–15. doi:10. 1016/S0304-3975(03)00400-6 Automata, Languages and Programming. [14] Min Chen, Shigang Chen, and Zhiping Cai. 2017. Counter Tree: A Scalable Counter Architecture for Per-Flow Traffic Measurement. IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 

25, 2 (April 2017), 1249–1262. doi:10.1109/TNET.2016.2621159 [15] Qizhi Chen, Yisen Hong, Yuhan Wu, Tong Yang, and Bin Cui. 2024. CodingSketch: A Hierarchical Sketch with Efficient Encoding and Recursive Decoding. In ICDE .1592–1605. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDE60146.2024.00130 [16] Yuvaraj Chesetti, Navid Eslami, Huanchen Zhang, Niv Dayan, and Prashant Pandey. 2026. Aeris Filter: A Strongly and Monotonically Adaptive Range Filter. In Proceedings of the 2026 International Conference on Management of Data (Ban-galore, India) (SIGMOD ’26) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1670–1684. [17] David Clark. 1997. Compact PAT trees . Ph. D. Dissertation. http://hdl.handle.net/ 10012/64 [18] Felix Cloutier. 2023. PDEP — Parallel Bits Deposit . https://www.felixcloutier.com/ x86/pdep [19] Graham Cormode and Minos Garofalakis. 2005. Sketching streams through the net: distributed approximate query tracking. In Proceedings of the 31st Interna-tional Conference on Very Large Data Bases (Trondheim, Norway) (VLDB ’05) .VLDB Endowment, 13–24. [20] Graham Cormode and S. Muthukrishnan. 2005. An improved data stream sum-mary: the count-min sketch and its applications. J. Algorithms 55, 1 (April 2005), 58–75. doi:10.1016/j.jalgor.2003.12.001 [21] G. Cormode and S. Muthukrishnan. 2005. What’s new: finding significant dif-ferences in network data streams. IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking 13, 6 (2005), 1219–1232. doi:10.1109/TNET.2005.860096 [22] Intel Corporation. 2018. 5-Level Paging and 5-Level EPT White Paper . Technical Report 335252-002. Intel Corporation. https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/ en/content-details/671442/5-level-paging-and-5-level-ept-white-paper.html Re-vision 1.1. [23] Intel Corporation. 2025. Intel ® 64 and IA-32 Architectures Software Devel-oper’s Manual, Volume 3A: System Programming Guide, Part 1 . Intel Corpo-ration. https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/technical/ intel-sdm.html Order Number 253668. [24] Zhenwei Dai, Aditya Desai, Reinhard Heckel, and Anshumali Shrivastava. 2021. Active Sampling Count Sketch (ASCS) for Online Sparse Estimation of a Trillion Scale Covariance Matrix. In Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference on Management of Data (Virtual Event, China) (SIGMOD ’21) . Association for Com-puting Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 352–364. doi:10.1145/3448016.3457327 [25] Niv Dayan, Ioana O. Bercea, and Rasmus Pagh. 2024. Aleph Filter: To Infinity in Constant Time. Proc. VLDB Endow. 17, 11 (July 2024), 3644–3656. doi:10.14778/ 3681954.3682027 [26] Niv Dayan, Ioana O. Bercea, Pedro Reviriego, and Rasmus Pagh. 2023. InfiniFilter: Expanding Filters to Infinity and Beyond. In Proceedings of the 2023 International Conference on Management of Data (Seattle, Washington, USA) (SIGMOD ’23, Vol. 1) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, Article 140, 27 pages. doi:10.1145/3589285 [27] Fan Deng and Davood Rafiei. [n. d.]. New Estimation Algorithms for Streaming Data: Count-min Can Do More. https://webdocs.cs.ualberta.ca/~drafiei/papers/ cmm.pdf [28] Rui Ding, Shibo Yang, Xiang Chen, and Qun Huang. 2023. BitSense: Universal and Nearly Zero-Error Optimization for Sketch Counters with Compressive Sensing. In Proceedings of the ACM SIGCOMM 2023 Conference (New York, NY, USA) (ACM SIGCOMM ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 220–238. doi:10.1145/3603269.3604865 [29] Navid Eslami, Ioana O. Bercea, and Niv Dayan. 2025. Diva: Dynamic Range Filter for Var-Length Keys and Queries. Proc. VLDB Endow. 18, 11 (July 2025), 3923–3936. doi:10.14778/3749646.3749664 [30] Guoju Gao, Zhaorong Qian, He Huang, and Yang Du. 2023. An Adaptive Counter-Splicing-Based Sketch for Efficient Per-Flow Size Measurement. 1–4. doi:10.1109/ IWQoS57198.2023.10188733 [31] Guoju Gao, Zhaorong Qian, He Huang, Yu-E Sun, and Yang Du. 2025. TailoredS-ketch: A Fast and Adaptive Sketch for Efficient Per-Flow Size Measurement. 

IEEE Transactions on Network Science and Engineering 12, 1 (2025), 505–517. doi:10.1109/TNSE.2024.3503904 [32] Lukasz Golab. 2009. Stream Models . Springer US, Boston, MA, 2834–2836. doi:10. 1007/978-0-387-39940-9_370 [33] Yu Gu, Andrew McCallum, and Don Towsley. 2005. Detecting anomalies in network traffic using maximum entropy estimation. In Proceedings of the 5th ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Internet Measurement (Berkeley, CA) (IMC ’05) .USENIX Association, USA, 32. [34] Mike Heddes, Igor Nunes, Tony Givargis, and Alex Nicolau. 2024. Convolution and Cross-Correlation of Count Sketches Enables Fast Cardinality Estimation of Multi-Join Queries. Proc. ACM Manag. Data 2, 3, Article 129 (May 2024), 26 pages. doi:10.1145/3654932 [35] Thomas Holterbach, Edgar Costa Molero, Maria Apostolaki, Alberto Dainotti, Stefano Vissicchio, and Laurent Vanbever. 2019. Blink: fast connectivity recov-ery entirely in the data plane. In Proceedings of the 16th USENIX Conference on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (Boston, MA, USA) (NSDI’19) .Accepted to SIGMOD 2026 

SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India Navid Eslami, Ioana O. Bercea, Rasmus Pagh, and Niv Dayan 

USENIX Association, USA, 161–176. [36] William George Horner. 1819. IX. A new method of solving numerical equations of all orders, by continuous approximation. Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of London 109 (1819), 308–335. [37] Yesdaulet Izenov. 2023. Query Optimization using Sketches in Relational Database Systems . PhD thesis. University of California, Merced, Merced, CA. Available at https://escholarship.org/uc/item/5k8334fs. [38] Yesdaulet Izenov, Asoke Datta, Florin Rusu, and Jun Hyung Shin. 2021. COM-PASS: Online Sketch-based Query Optimization for In-Memory Databases. In 

Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference on Management of Data (Virtual Event, China) (SIGMOD ’21) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 804–816. doi:10.1145/3448016.3452840 [39] The kernel development community. 2024. 5-level paging. Linux Kernel Documen-tation. https://docs.kernel.org/arch/x86/x86_64/5level-paging.html Accessed: 2026-01-19. [40] Martin Kiefer, Ilias Poulakis, Eleni Tzirita Zacharatou, and Volker Markl. 2023. Optimistic Data Parallelism for FPGA-Accelerated Sketching. Proc. VLDB Endow. 

16, 5 (Jan. 2023), 1113–1125. doi:10.14778/3579075.3579085 [41] Donald E. Knuth. 1997. The Art of Computer Programming, Volume 2 (3rd Ed.): Seminumerical Algorithms . Addison-Wesley Professional, USA. [42] George Kollios, John Byers, Jeffrey Considine, Marios Hadjieleftheriou, and Feifei Li. 2005. Robust Aggregation in Sensor Networks. Bulletin of the IEEE Computer Society Technical Committee on Data Engineering (2005). https://www2.cs.arizona. edu/classes/cs645/fall05/cs645-papers/DataAggregation/dataC.pdf Special Issue on Data Management in Sensor Networks. [43] Balachander Krishnamurthy, Subhabrata Sen, Yin Zhang, and Yan Chen. 2003. Sketch-based change detection: methods, evaluation, and applications. In Pro-ceedings of the 3rd ACM SIGCOMM Conference on Internet Measurement (Miami Beach, FL, USA) (IMC ’03) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 234–247. doi:10.1145/948205.948236 [44] Florian Kurpicz. 2022. Engineering Compact Data Structures for Rank and Select Queries on Bit Vectors. In String Processing and Information Retrieval – 29th International Symposium, SPIRE 2022, Concepción, Chile, November 8–10, 2022, Proceedings. Ed.: D. Arroyuelo (Lecture Notes in Computer Science, Vol. 13617) .Springer International Publishing, 257–272. doi:10.1007/978-3-031-20643-6_19 [45] Rhodes Lee, Alaxander Lang, Kevin Saydakov, Justin Thaler, Edo Liberty, and Jon Malkin. 2025. DataSketches: A Java software library of stochastic streaming algorithms . https://datasketches.apache.org/ [46] Haoyu Li, Qizhi Chen, Yixin Zhang, Tong Yang, and Bin Cui. 2022. Stingy sketch: a sketch framework for accurate and fast frequency estimation. Proc. VLDB Endow. 15, 7 (March 2022), 1426–1438. doi:10.14778/3523210.3523220 [47] Jizhou Li, Zikun Li, Yifei Xu, Shiqi Jiang, Tong Yang, Bin Cui, Yafei Dai, and Gong Zhang. 2020. WavingSketch: An Unbiased and Generic Sketch for Finding Top-k Items in Data Streams. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining (Virtual Event, CA, USA) 

(KDD ’20) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1574–1584. doi:10.1145/3394486.3403208 [48] Shangsen Li, Lailong Luo, Deke Guo, Qianzhen Zhang, and Pengtao Fu. 2020. A survey of sketches in traffic measurement: Design, Optimization, Application and Implementation. https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:236140679 [49] Shangsen Li, Lailong Luo, Deke Guo, Qianzhen Zhang, and Pengtao Fu. 2020. A survey of sketches in traffic measurement: Design, Optimization, Application and Implementation. https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:236140679 [50] Weihe Li and Paul Patras. 2023. P-Sketch: A Fast and Accurate Sketch for Persistent Item Lookup. IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 32, 2 (Aug. 2023), 987–1002. doi:10.1109/TNET.2023.3306897 [51] Weihe Li and Paul Patras. 2023. Tight-Sketch: A High-Performance Sketch for Heavy Item-Oriented Data Stream Mining with Limited Memory Size. In Pro-ceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management (Birmingham, United Kingdom) (CIKM ’23) . Association for Com-puting Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1328–1337. doi:10.1145/3583780.3615080 [52] Zirui Liu, Yixin Zhang, Yifan Zhu, Ruwen Zhang, Tong Yang, Kun Xie, Sha Wang, Tao Li, and Bin Cui. 2023. TreeSensing: Linearly Compressing Sketches with Flexibility. Proc. ACM Manag. Data 1, 1, Article 56 (May 2023), 28 pages. doi:10.1145/3588910 [53] Claudio Lucchese, Salvatore Orlando, Raffaele Perego, and Fabrizio Silvestri. 2012. Frequent Itemset Mining Dataset Repository, Webdocs. http://fimi.uantwerpen. be/data/ [54] Dzejla Medjedovic, Emin Tahirovic, and Ines Dedovic. 2025. Algorithms and data structures for massive datasets . Manning Publications Co., Chapter 4. [55] Ahmed Metwally, Divyakant Agrawal, and Amr El Abbadi. 2005. Efficient com-putation of frequent and top-k elements in data streams. In Proceedings of the 10th International Conference on Database Theory (Edinburgh, UK) (ICDT’05) .Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg, 398–412. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-30570-5_27 [56] Jayadev Misra and David Gries. 1982. Finding Repeated Elements . Technical Report. USA. [57] Daisuke Okanohara and Kunihiko Sadakane. 2007. Practical entropy-compressed rank/select dictionary. In Proceedings of the Meeting on Algorithm Engineering & Expermiments (New Orleans, Louisiana). Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics, USA, 60–70. [58] Rasmus Pagh, Gil Segev, and Udi Wieder. 2013. How to Approximate a Set without Knowing Its Size in Advance. 2013 IEEE 54th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (2013), 80–89. https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID: 10365891 [59] Prashant Pandey, Michael A. Bender, Rob Johnson, and Rob Patro. 2017. AGeneral-Purpose Counting Filter: Making Every Bit Count. In Proceedings of the 2017 ACM International Conference on Management of Data (Chicago, Illinois, USA) (SIGMOD ’17) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 775–787. doi:10.1145/3035918.3035963 [60] Mihai Patrascu. 2008. Succincter. In Proceedings of the 2008 49th Annual IEEE Sym-posium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS ’08) . IEEE Computer Society, USA, 305–313. doi:10.1109/FOCS.2008.83 [61] Lee Rhodes. 2023. Insights from Engineering Sketches for Production and Using Sketches at Scale . https://simons.berkeley.edu/talks/lee-rhodes-yahoo-inc-2023-10-12 [62] Arik Rinberg, Alexander Spiegelman, Edward Bortnikov, Eshcar Hillel, Idit Keidar, Lee Rhodes, and Hadar Serviansky. 2022. Fast Concurrent Data Sketches. ACM Trans. Parallel Comput. 9, 2, Article 6 (April 2022), 35 pages. doi:10.1145/3512758 [63] Pratanu Roy, Arijit Khan, and Gustavo Alonso. 2016. Augmented Sketch: Faster and More Accurate Stream Processing. In Proceedings of the 2016 International Conference on Management of Data (San Francisco, California, USA) (SIGMOD ’16) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1449–1463. doi:10.1145/2882903.2882948 [64] Simon Scherrer, Che-Yu Wu, Yu-Hsi Chiang, Benjamin Rothenberger, Daniele Asoni, Arish Sateesan, Jo Vliegen, Nele Mentens, Hsu-Chun Hsiao, and Adrian Perrig. 2021. Low-Rate Overuse Flow Tracer (LOFT): An Efficient and Scalable Algorithm for Detecting Overuse Flows. 265–276. doi:10.1109/SRDS53918.2021. 00034 [65] Qilong Shi, Chengjun Jia, Wenjun Li, Zaoxing Liu, Tong Yang, Jianan Ji, Gaogang Xie, Weizhe Zhang, and Minlan Yu. 2024. BitMatcher: Bit-level Counter Adjust-ment for Sketches. In 2024 IEEE 40th International Conference on Data Engineering (ICDE) . 4815–4827. doi:10.1109/ICDE60146.2024.00366 [66] Yoshihiro Shibuya, Djamal Belazzougui, and Gregory Kucherov. 2021. Set-Min sketch: a probabilistic map for power-law distri-butions with application to k-mer annotation. bioRxiv (2021). arXiv:https://www.biorxiv.org/content/early/2021/02/25/2020.11.14.382713.full.pdf doi:10.1101/2020.11.14.382713 [67] Lu Tang, Qun Huang, and Patrick P. C. Lee. 2019. MV-Sketch: A Fast and Compact Invertible Sketch for Heavy Flow Detection in Network Data Streams. In IEEE INFOCOM 2019 - IEEE Conference on Computer Communications (Paris, France). IEEE Press, 2026–2034. doi:10.1109/INFOCOM.2019.8737499 [68] Daniel Ting. 2018. Data Sketches for Disaggregated Subset Sum and Frequent Item Estimation. In Proceedings of the 2018 International Conference on Management of Data (Houston, TX, USA) (SIGMOD ’18) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 1129–1140. doi:10.1145/3183713.3183759 [69] Transaction Processing Performance Council (TPC). 2024. TPC Benchmark ™ H(Decision Support). https://www.tpc.org/tpch/. Accessed: 2025-12-03. [70] David Vengerov, Andre Cavalheiro Menck, Mohamed Zait, and Sunil P. Chakkap-pen. 2015. Join size estimation subject to filter conditions. Proc. VLDB Endow. 8, 12 (Aug. 2015), 1530–1541. doi:10.14778/2824032.2824051 [71] A. Wagner and B. Plattner. 2005. Entropy based worm and anomaly detection in fast IP networks. In 14th IEEE International Workshops on Enabling Technologies: Infrastructure for Collaborative Enterprise (WETICE’05) . 172–177. doi:10.1109/ WETICE.2005.35 [72] Henry S. Warren, Jr. 2012. Hacker’s Delight (2nd ed.). Addison-Wesley Profes-sional, Upper Saddle River, NJ. [73] Yuhan Wu, Shiqi Jiang, Siyuan Dong, Zheng Zhong, Jiale Chen, Yutong Hu, Tong Yang, Steve Uhlig, and Bin Cui. 2023. MicroscopeSketch: Accurate Sliding Estimation Using Adaptive Zooming. In Proceedings of the 29th ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (Long Beach, CA, USA) 

(KDD ’23) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2660–2671. doi:10.1145/3580305.3599432 [74] Jiqiang Xia, Le Tian, Yuxiang Hu, Ziyong Li, Penghao Sun, and Jianhua Peng. 2025. CoDDoS: Detecting and mitigating diverse DDoS attacks with programmable switches. Comput. Commun. 240, C (Aug. 2025), 13 pages. doi:10.1016/j.comcom. 2025.108215 [75] Tong Yang, Junzhi Gong, Haowei Zhang, Lei Zou, Lei Shi, and Xiaoming Li. 2018. HeavyGuardian: Separate and Guard Hot Items in Data Streams. In Proceedings of the 24th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining (London, United Kingdom) (KDD ’18) . Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 2584–2593. doi:10.1145/3219819.3219978 [76] Tong Yang, Jie Jiang, Peng Liu, Qun Huang, Junzhi Gong, Yang Zhou, Rui Miao, Xiaoming Li, and Steve Uhlig. 2018. Elastic sketch: adaptive and fast network-wide measurements. In Proceedings of the 2018 Conference of the ACM Special Interest Group on Data Communication (Budapest, Hungary) (SIGCOMM ’18) .Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 561–575. doi:10. Accepted to SIGMOD 2026 

Sublime: Sublinear Error & Space for Unbounded Skewed Streams SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India 

1145/3230543.3230544 [77] Tong Yang, Haowei Zhang, Jinyang Li, Junzhi Gong, Steve Uhlig, Shigang Chen, and Xiaoming Li. 2019. HeavyKeeper: An Accurate Algorithm for Finding Top-𝑘 

Elephant Flows. IEEE/ACM Trans. Netw. 27, 5 (Oct. 2019), 1845–1858. doi:10.1109/ TNET.2019.2933868 [78] Tong Yang, Yang Zhou, Hao Jin, Shigang Chen, and Xiaoming Li. 2017. Pyramid sketch: a sketch framework for frequency estimation of data streams. Proc. VLDB Endow. 10, 11 (Aug. 2017), 1442–1453. doi:10.14778/3137628.3137652 [79] Boyu Zhang, He Huang, Yu-E. Sun, Yang Du, and Dan Wang. 2024. Jigsaw-Sketch: a fast and accurate algorithm for finding top-k elephant flows in high-speed networks. Science China Information Sciences 67, 4 (20 Mar 2024), 142101. doi:10.1007/s11432-022-3794-1 [80] Qingpeng Zhang, Jason Pell, Rosangela Canino-Koning, Adina Chuang Howe, and C Titus Brown. 2014. These are not the k-mers you are looking for: efficient online k-mer counting using a probabilistic data structure. PloS one 9, 7 (2014), e101271. [81] Dong Zhou, David G. Andersen, and Michael Kaminsky. 2013. Space-Efficient, High-Performance Rank and Select Structures on Uncompressed Bit Sequences. In Experimental Algorithms , Vincenzo Bonifaci, Camil Demetrescu, and Alberto Marchetti-Spaccamela (Eds.). Springer Berlin Heidelberg, Berlin, Heidelberg, 151–163. Accepted to SIGMOD 2026  

> SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India Navid Eslami, Ioana O. Bercea, Rasmus Pagh, and Niv Dayan

Insert 𝑥   

> Exists
> Does not exist, Empty slot
> Does not exist, No empty slot
> +1
> Store (𝑥, 1)
> −1

Query 𝑞  

> Exists, 4
> Otherwise, 0
> 𝑞 4

Figure 17: MG uses dedicated counters to track frequent keys. 

A APPLYING SUBLIME TO MISRA-GRIES 

We now apply Sublime to Misra-Gries to derive Sublime MG .

Misra-Gries (MG). By using dedicated counters to track the most frequent keys, MG achieves high accuracy under skewed work-loads. Moreover, by only incrementing a key’s dedicated counter when it is inserted, MG ensures that it never overestimates the key counts. This property is ideal for finding the most frequent keys, as described in Section 1, since it guarantees that the frequency of those keys is at least as large as the estimates. Figure 17 presents an overview of MG. MG maintains an array of slots, each storing a key (shown in gray) and a dedicated frequency counter (shown in white). MG estimates the frequency of each key in the array as the value of its counter. It returns an estimate of zero for untracked keys. When inserting a key 𝑥 , MG first checks if it has a dedicated counter in some slot. If it does, MG increments 𝑥 ’s counter. If not, and the array has an empty slot, MG stores 𝑥 in it with a count of 1. If 𝑥 is not in the array and the array is full, MG decrements all counters and discards any keys whose counters become zero. Such keys are unlikely to be among the most frequent, and their slots are better used for tracking more frequent keys. Note that 𝑥 is not stored in the newly emptied slots and is only stored if it is inserted when some slot is already empty. MG does not support deletions without deteriorating the error bound [ 4]. This is because it lacks information about the untracked keys, which may become the heavy hitters after the current heavy hitters are deleted, thereby failing to place them in its array. Having more slots in the array allows MG to track more keys without discarding them, leading to more accurate estimates. Since MG is a deterministic data structure that does not use hashing, unlike CMS and CS, it does not suffer from hash collisions, and its estimations are within the error bounds with full confidence. Using an array of 𝑤 slots, MG estimates the frequency of any key with an error of at most 𝑁 𝑤 , i.e., | ˆ𝑓 (𝑥 ) − 𝑓 (𝑥 )|≤ 𝑁 𝑤 for any key 𝑥 . Since it uses dedicated counters for the heavy hitters, it also provides a strong “ Tail Guarantee ,” stating that the error for any key is at most min 1≤𝑖 ≤𝑤 𝑁 res (𝑖 ) 

> 𝑤 −𝑖 +1

, where 𝑁 res (𝑖 ) is the total frequency of all keys not among the top 𝑖 . Note that 𝑁 res (𝑖 ) is much smaller than 𝑁 

when the data is skewed. It is possible to modify MG to support unbiased estimation by probabilistically replacing the array’s least frequent key newly inserted keys [ 68 ]. Other variations of MG achieve higher accuracy in practice, but suffer from two-sided errors in exchange [55]. Typical implementations of MG use a hash table to implement the array of keys, yielding constant-time queries. They also opti-mize insertions by lazily decrementing the counters and employ-ing an auxiliary heap to locate and discard keys with zero counts in 𝑂 ( log 𝑤 ) time. Insertions can be sped up to constant time using a specialized data structure similar to a linked list in exchange for a higher memory footprint [55]. 

Accommodating Skew. The counts of the heavy hitters stored in MG may still exhibit skew among themselves. This leads to memory wastage if the counter values are stored in uniformly-sized counters, as in the case of CMS and CS. Sublime MG addresses this issue by applying VALE to the counters. Since VALE requires the counters to be tightly packed in memory without any keys in-between them, Sublime MG stores the counter values in a separate array that mirrors the ordering of the keys within the slots before applying VALE. 

Accommodating Unbounded Data Growth. As MG’s esti-mation error is 𝑁 /𝑤 (or min 1≤𝑖 ≤𝑤 𝑁 res (𝑖 )/(𝑤 − 𝑖 + 1) in the tail case), which mirrors that of CMS, Sublime MG expands based on the growth of the total number of keys 𝑁 . Since MG does not hash keys and can place them in any slot within the array, Sublime MG 

expands on a slot-by-slot basis. This is in contrast to Sublime CMS 

and Sublime CS , which must double the size of their arrays to en-able consistent hashing. As such, Sublime MG smoothly increases its number of slots while ensuring that it doubles every time 𝑁 more than doubles. This approach ensures that the number of counters in the array matches the size function 𝑊 (𝑁 ) encoding the expansion policy at all times. Moreover, this incremental approach always maintains at least as many counters as doubling the number of counters in one go. Therefore, it allows for attaining errors that grow at a slower rate—by a constant factor. Because MG does not support deletions, Sublime MG does not need to support contractions and can forgo storing a record of the sketch’s state. 

Theoretical Analysis. Following a similar argument as that for Sublime CMS , we analyze the interaction of the number of times the count of each is decremented in Sublime MG with the size function to bound its estimation error: 

Theorem A.1. When using a size function 𝑊 (·) on a stream with a total key count of 𝑁 , Sublime MG provides an estimation error 𝐸 (𝑁 )

satisfying 

𝐸 (𝑁 ) ≤

(

𝑂 (1) · 𝜖𝑁 1−𝛼 if 𝑊 (𝑁 ) = 𝑁 𝛼 /𝜖 , for 𝛼 ∈ [0 , 1) ,

ln 𝑁 · 𝜖 if 𝑊 (𝑁 ) = 𝑁 /𝜖 .Compared to a fixed-size MG allocated upfront with an array of 𝑊 (𝑁 )

counters with knowledge of 𝑁 , the error terms above are higher by at most a constant and a logarithmic factor. 

Compared to the bounds from Theorems 4.1 and 4.2, the logarith-mic term in the linear case of 𝑊 (𝑁 ) is a natural logarithmic, which is smaller by a constant factor. Note that setting 𝜖 ≤ 1 in the linear case trivially yields an error bound of 0, as Sublime MG will always grow enough to store the exact counts of the keys without ever decrementing counters. Interestingly, setting 𝜖 to be even slightly larger than 1 creates the logarithmic overhead of Theorem A.1. In addition, MG’s tail guarantee generalized to Sublime MG with the same sublinearity property as that of Theorem A.1: 

Theorem A.2. When using a size function 𝑊 (·) on a stream with a total key count of 𝑁 , Sublime MG provides an estimation error 𝐸 (𝑁 )Accepted to SIGMOD 2026  

> Sublime: Sublinear Error & Space for Unbounded Skewed Streams SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India

satisfying 

𝐸 (𝑁 ) ≤

(

𝑂 (1) · 𝜖  𝑁 res (𝑘 ) 1−𝛼 + 𝑂 (𝑘 1/𝛼 −1) if 𝑊 (𝑁 ) = 𝑁 𝛼 /𝜖 

ln 𝑁 res (𝑘 ) · 𝜖 + log 2 𝑘 if 𝑊 (𝑁 ) = 𝑁 /𝜖 ,where 𝑁 𝑟𝑒𝑠 (𝑘 ) is the total count of the keys not among the top 𝑘 .

The additive terms in the error bounds above come from the possibility of Sublime MG not having 𝑘 counters from the onset. This forces it to “wait out” the stream until the array grows enough to contain at least 𝑘 counters, introducing these additive error. These additive terms vanish if Sublime MG is allocated 𝑘 counters from the start. 

B UPPER BOUNDS: SUBLIME CMS , SUBLIME CS ,AND SUBLIME MG 

For simplicity, we will first discuss the analysis for the case in which we have an insertion-only stream, and later discuss why our arguments carry over when we also have deletions. In the following, we will also assume that, for both CS and CMS, the number of arrays we employ is 𝑑 = 1 . This does not change the expected error (in the case of CMS) or the variance of the error (in the case of CS), merely the confidence we have over the estimate. We will do the analysis assuming a general size function 𝑊 (·) and then discuss how the analysis proceeds for specific instantiantions of 𝑊 (·) (linear or sub-linear regime). Note that we perform dou-bling each time the function 𝑊 (·) doubles. In the case of CMS, 

𝑊 (·) is a function of 𝑁 = P 𝑓 (𝑥 ), the total number of keys in the stream. In the case of CS, 𝑊 (·) is a function of 𝐹 = P(𝑓 (𝑥 )) 2, the squared ℓ2-norm of the stream. In either case, we can track the mo-ments in time in which the value of the function doubles. Formally, instead of thinking of 𝑊 (·) as a function of the total key count 𝑁 or the squared ℓ2-norm of the stream, we think of it as a function of time such that, at any point in time 𝑡 , 𝑊 𝑡 is the number of counters the sketch uses. 

Division of Time into Epochs. Let 𝑇 0 be the time at which the sketch is instantiated. This sketch has 𝑊 0 counters and is used as long as the length of the stream is at most 𝑁 0. We then define 𝑇 𝑖 

for 𝑖 ≥ 1 to be the first moment in time when the length of the array doubles, i.e., 𝑊 𝑖 = 2 · 𝑊 𝑖 −1. Note that, in between times 𝑇 𝑖 

and 𝑇 𝑖 +1 , the length of the array stays the same (i.e., it is equal to 𝑊 𝑖 ). We call this period of time Epoch 𝑖 and denote the sketch in this epoch by S𝑖 .Formally, let (𝑥, 1) be an insertion that occured in epoch 𝑗 before the current epoch, i.e., epoch 𝑖 . During expansions, this update operation is replicated on all the counters in S𝑖 that 𝑥 could have hashed into. Namely, if 𝑥 hashed to an index J𝑥 in epoch 𝑗 for one of the arrays, then, during epoch 𝑖 , all of the 2𝑗 −𝑖 counters 

{0, 1}𝑗 −𝑖 ◦ J 𝑥 ingest the insertion of 𝑥 , where ◦ denotes concatena-tion and {0, 1}𝑗 −𝑖 denotes all binary strings of length 𝑗 − 𝑖 . From the perspective of a counter in S𝑖 , what this means is that it ingests previous updates from elements that don’t technically hash into it. We describe this in more detail in what follows. 

Copying Counters from Previous Epochs. Let I be a counter in epoch 𝑖 . This counter ingests the following operations: 

• Updates (𝑥, 1) within epoch 𝑖 for which ℎ(𝑥 ) = I. This event occurs with probability 1/𝑊 𝑖 since there are 𝑊 𝑖 coun-ters in the array during that epoch. For ease of analysis, we define C𝑖, I (𝑥 ) to be the indicator random variable that is 1 if this event occurs and 0 otherwise. Then, we have that Pr C𝑖, I (𝑥 ) = 1  = 1 /𝑊 𝑖 .

• Updates (𝑥, 1) from epoch 𝑖 −1 that, during epoch 𝑖 −1, hashed into a counter that matches the lower-order 𝑖 − 1 bits of I’s address in binary. This event occurs with probability 2/𝑊 𝑖 .The factor 2 accounts for the counter in S𝑖 −1 that was copied during the previous expansion. 

• In general, updates (𝑥, 1) from epoch 𝑗 where 𝑗 < 𝑖 and for which ℎ(𝑥 ) matches I in the lower-order 𝑗 bits of its binary representation. This event occurs with probability 2𝑖 − 𝑗 /𝑊 𝑖 .Similarly as before, we define C𝑗, I (𝑥 ) to be the indicator random variable that is 1 if this event occurs and 0 otherwise. Then, Pr C𝑗, I (𝑥 ) = 1  = 2 𝑖 − 𝑗 /𝑊 𝑖 .While updates from previous epochs have a higher chance of hashing into I than updates in epoch 𝑖 , we can nevertheless bound the influence they have on the total error of the estimate returned by CMS, CS, and MG. 

Streams with deletions. In order to account for deletions, we relate the state of Sublime in a stream with deletions to the state of a different Sublime with higher errors on an insertion-only stream. To begin with, notice that, due to the way we perform contractions, we can pretend that all previous epochs have only insertions in them (the state of counters in Sublime is smaller than if we only had insertions previously). We now argue about deletions (𝑥, −1) 

that only occur during the current epoch 𝑖 and that have not trig-gered a contraction. If, during the same epoch 𝑖 , there is also an insertion (𝑥, 1) , then we can act as if this insertion-deletion pair did not occur in the stream, i.e., the value of the counter incurs no change during that epoch 𝑖 . Any extra deletions during epoch 𝑖 

that are not cancelled out by insertions during the same epoch can only decrement the value of the counter, and they do not negatively affect the upper bounds we compute. In other words, the value of the counter in epoch 𝑖 is smaller than its value in a stream in which we remove these extra deletions. Most crucially, by considering this insertion-only stream, we do not miss any errors the counter accu-mulates from previous epochs. Namely, during epoch 𝑖 , counter I

might still incur errors from previous insertions of 𝑥 from epochs 

𝑗 < 𝑖 that would not have hashed to it during epoch 𝑖 (i.e., the event C𝑗, I (𝑥 ) still holds and we cannot undo it since we do not know when the last insertion of 𝑥 occured). 

B.1 Upper Bounds for Sublime CMS 

In the case of Sublime CMS , each counter gathers the sum of fre-quencies of keys that hash into it or counters that copied into it. Recall that the total key count 𝑁 in a stream is the total sum of frequencies of that stream. We show the following: 

Lemma B.1. Letting 𝐸 (𝑁 ) denote the estimation error of Sublime CMS 

when using a size function 𝑊 (·) and one array on a stream with a total of 𝑁 keys, we have at the end of epoch 𝑖 that 

E [𝐸 (𝑁 𝑖 +1 )] ≤ 1

𝑊 𝑖 

·

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

2𝑖 − 𝑗 · (𝑁 𝑗 +1 − 𝑁 𝑗 ),Accepted to SIGMOD 2026 

SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India Navid Eslami, Ioana O. Bercea, Rasmus Pagh, and Niv Dayan 

where 𝑁 𝑗 for 𝑗 ≥ 0 denotes the total number of keys in the stream at the start of epoch 𝑗 .

Proof. During epoch 𝑖 , we have at most 𝑁 𝑖 +1 − 𝑁 𝑖 fresh inser-tions (i.e., that have not been cancelled out by deletions). Let 𝑓 𝑖 (𝑥 )

denote the increase, if any, in the frequency of 𝑥 during epoch 𝑖 . We observe that P𝑥 𝑓 𝑗 (𝑥 ) = 𝑁 𝑗 +1 − 𝑁 𝑗 for all 𝑗 ≥ 0. This implies that, in our previous notation, 𝐸 (𝑁 𝑖 +1 ) ≤ I , which can be expressed as 

𝐸 (𝑁 𝑖 +1 ) ≤ I =

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

∑︁ 𝑥 

C𝑗, I (𝑥 ) · 𝑓 𝑗 (𝑥 ).

In other words, the counter I gets the frequency 𝑓 𝑗 (𝑥 ) added to it if and only if the event C𝑗, I (𝑥 ) occurs. We also have that E C𝑗, I (𝑥 ) =2𝑖 − 𝑗 /𝑊 𝑖 . By linearity of expectation, we then get 

E [I] =

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

∑︁ 𝑥 

2𝑖 − 𝑗 

𝑊 𝑖 

· 𝑓 𝑗 (𝑥 ) = 1

𝑊 𝑖 

·

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

∑︁ 𝑥 

2𝑖 − 𝑗 · 𝑓 𝑗 (𝑥 )= 1

𝑊 𝑖 

·

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

2𝑖 − 𝑗 ∑︁ 

> 𝑥

𝑓 𝑗 (𝑥 ) = 1

𝑊 𝑖 

·

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

2𝑖 − 𝑗 · (𝑁 𝑗 +1 − 𝑁 𝑗 ).

The claim follows. □

In other words, the increase in error we get due to copying the counters is dominated by the term P𝑖 𝑗 =0 2𝑖 − 𝑗 · (𝑁 𝑗 +1 − 𝑁 𝑗 ). This is where the specific size function 𝑊 (·) we employ has an effect, as it translates into bounds on 𝑁 𝑗 and their relative sizes. We now consider various special cases and discuss their respective behavior: 

Theorem 4.1. When using a size function 𝑊 (·) and a single array on a stream with a total key count of 𝑁 , Sublime CMS provides an estimation error 𝐸 (𝑁 ) satisfying 

E [𝐸 (𝑁 )] ≤ 

(

𝑂 (1) · 𝜖𝑁 1−𝛼 if 𝑊 (𝑁 ) = 𝑁 𝛼 /𝜖 , for 𝛼 ∈ [0 , 1) ,

log 2 𝑁 · 𝜖 if 𝑊 (𝑁 ) = 𝑁 /𝜖 .Compared to a fixed-size CMS allocated upfront with an array of 𝑊 (𝑁 )

counters with knowledge of 𝑁 , the expected error terms above are higher by at most a constant and a logarithmic factor. 

Proof. 

The Linear Case of 𝑊 (𝑁 ) = 𝑁 /𝜖 . In this case, the size function doubles whenever the number of elements doubles, i.e., 𝑁 𝑗 +1 = 2 ·𝑁 𝑗 

for all 𝑗 ≥ 0 and, in general, 𝑁 𝑗 = 2 𝑗 · 𝑁 0 for all 𝑗 ≥ 0. The additional error term then becomes: 

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

2𝑖 − 𝑗 · (𝑁 𝑗 +1 − 𝑁 𝑗 ) = 

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

2𝑖 − 𝑗 · (2 𝑗 +1 · 𝑁 0 − 2𝑗 · 𝑁 0)=

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

2𝑖 − 𝑗 · 2𝑗 · 𝑁 0 = ( 𝑖 + 1) · 2𝑖 · 𝑁 0

= ( 𝑖 + 1) · 𝑁 𝑖 .

Plugging in this bound in the formula from Lemma B.1 (i.e., dividing by 𝑊 (𝑁 𝑖 ) = 𝑁 𝑖 /𝜖 ), we get the main claim for 𝑊 (𝑁 ) = 𝑁 /𝜖 .

The Sublinear Case of 𝑊 (𝑁 ) = 𝑁 𝛼 /𝜖 . In this case, the size function doubles more slowly, i.e., whenever 𝑁 𝑖 +1 = 2 1/𝛼 · 𝑁 𝑖 .Since 0 ≤ 𝛼 < 1, 𝑁 𝑖 +1 is bigger than 2 · 𝑁 𝑖 . This difference is why we do not have the extra dependency on 𝑖 in the error term. Formally, we have that 𝑁 𝑖 = 2 𝑖 /𝛼 · 𝑁 0 and thus 

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

2𝑖 − 𝑗 · (𝑁 𝑗 +1 −𝑁 𝑗 ) = 

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

2𝑖 − 𝑗 · (2 (𝑗 +1) /𝛼 · 𝑁 0 − 2𝑗 /𝛼 · 𝑁 0)=

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

2𝑖 − 𝑗 · 2𝑗 /𝛼 · 𝑁 0 · (2 1/𝛼 − 1) = 2 𝑖 · 𝑁 0 · (2 1/𝛼 − 1) ·

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

2𝑗 /𝛼 − 𝑗 

= 2 (1 −1/𝛼 )·(𝑖 +1) −1 · 𝑁 𝑖 +1 · (2 1/𝛼 − 1) ·

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

2𝑗 /𝛼 − 𝑗 ,

where in the last step we have used 𝑁 0 = 2 (−1/𝛼 )·(𝑖 +1) · 𝑁 𝑖 +1 . Simpli-fying the sum of the geometric series on the right as 2(1 /𝛼 −1) ·(𝑖 +1) −121/𝛼 −1 −1

then yields 

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

2𝑖 − 𝑗 · (𝑁 𝑗 +1 − 𝑁 𝑗 )= 2 (1 −1/𝛼 )·(𝑖 +1) −1 · 𝑁 𝑖 +1 · (2 1/𝛼 − 1) · 2(1 /𝛼 −1) ·(𝑖 +1) − 121/𝛼 −1 − 1= 𝑁 𝑖 +1 · (2 1/𝛼 − 1) · 2−1 − 2(1 −1/𝛼 )·(𝑖 +1) −1

21/𝛼 −1 − 1= 𝑁 𝑖 +1 · (2 1/𝛼 − 1) · 1 − 2(1 −1/𝛼 )·(𝑖 +1) 

21/𝛼 − 2= 𝑁 𝑖 +1 · (2 1/𝛼 − 1) · 1 − 2(𝛼 −1) ·log 2(𝑁 𝑖 +1 /𝑁 0)

21/𝛼 − 2

≤ 𝑁 𝑖 +1 · 21/𝛼 − 121/𝛼 − 2 .

In the penultimate line, we have used the property that 𝑖 + 1 is equal to log 21/𝛼 (𝑁 𝑖 +1 /𝑁 0) = log 21/𝛼 2 · log 2(𝑁 𝑖 +1 /𝑁 0) = 𝛼 · log 2(𝑁 𝑖 +1 /𝑁 0).Moreover, in the last line, we have removed the negative exponential to derive the final upper bound. The claim follows by plugging this bound in the expected error from Lemma B.1. □

B.2 Upper Bounds for Sublime CS 

For Sublime CS , we obtain a similar bound to that of Lemma B.1, except as a function of the squared ℓ2-norm of the stream: 

Lemma B.2. Like CS, Sublime CMS provides unbiased estimates. More-over, letting 𝑉 (𝐹 ) denote its estimation variance when using a size function 𝑊 (·) and one array on a stream with squared ℓ2-norm 

𝐹 = P𝑦 (𝑓 (𝑦 )) 2, we have at the end of epoch 𝑖 that 

𝑉 (𝐹 𝑖 +1 ) ≤ 1

𝑊 𝑖 

·

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

2𝑖 − 𝑗 · (𝐹 𝑗 +1 − 𝐹 𝑗 ),

where 𝐹 𝑗 denotes the squared ℓ2-norm of the stream at the start of epoch 𝑗 .

Proof. We are interested in describing the behavior of the ran-dom variable ˆ𝑓 (𝑧 ) = I · 𝜎 (𝑧 ) for any query 𝑧 , where 𝜎 (𝑧 ) is 𝑧 ’s update direction and I is the counter that 𝑧 hashes into. Using the notation we introduced in Section B.1, this counter I can be expressed as: 

I =

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

∑︁ 𝑥 

C𝑗, I (𝑥 ) · 𝑓 𝑗 (𝑥 ) · 𝜎 (𝑥 ) = ∑︁ 𝑥 

C(𝑥 ),Accepted to SIGMOD 2026 

Sublime: Sublinear Error & Space for Unbounded Skewed Streams SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India 

where C(𝑥 ) = P𝑖 𝑗 =0 C𝑗, I (𝑥 ) · 𝑓 𝑗 (𝑥 ) · 𝜎 (𝑥 ) denotes the contribution of 𝑥 ’s updates to counter I throughout the epochs. We apply a similar analysis to that of a traditional CS to compute the expected value of the estimate ˆ𝑓 (𝑧 ), showing that I · 𝜎 (𝑧 ) is an unbiased estimator of 𝑓 (𝑧 ), i.e., E [I · 𝜎 (𝑧 )] = 𝑓 (𝑧 ). In the follow-ing, we denote by 𝑓 𝑗 (𝑥 ) the frequency of key 𝑥 within epoch 𝑗 . By linearity of expectation, it holds that 

E

h ˆ𝑓 (𝑧 )

i

=∑︁  

> 𝑥 ̸=𝑧

E [C (𝑥 ) · 𝜎 (𝑧 )] + E [C (𝑧 )𝜎 (𝑧 )] =

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

𝑓 𝑗 (𝑧 ) = 𝑓 (𝑧 ),

where the last step uses the property that E [𝜎 (𝑥 ) · 𝜎 (𝑧 )] = 0 for any 

𝑥 ̸ = 𝑧 , in conjunction with C𝑗, I (𝑧 ) = 1 since ℎ(𝑧 ) = I. This proves the first part of the lemma. We now turn to bound the variance of this estimator. In particular, we are interested in how much bigger it becomes compared to 𝐹 𝑖 /𝑊 𝑖 .Writing the definition of the variance, we get that 

Var 

 ˆ𝑓 (𝑧 )



= E

"∑︁ 

> 𝑥

C(𝑥 )𝜎 (𝑧 )

2 #

− (𝑓 (𝑧 )) 2

=∑︁ 𝑥 

E (C (𝑥 ))2  +∑︁ 𝑥 ∑︁ 𝑦 ̸ =𝑥 

E [C (𝑥 )C(𝑦 )] − (𝑓 (𝑧 )) 2

=∑︁ 𝑥 

E (C (𝑥 ))2  − (𝑓 (𝑧 )) 2.

In the third line we have used the property that E [𝜎 (𝑥 ) · 𝜎 (𝑦 )] = 0 

for any 𝑥 ̸ = 𝑦 to simplify E [C (𝑥 )C(𝑦 )] to 0. To bound E (C (𝑥 ))2 ,recall that we defined C(𝑥 ) = P𝑖 𝑗 =0 C𝑗, I (𝑥 ) · 𝑓 𝑗 (𝑥 ) · 𝜎 (𝑥 ). Then: 

E (C (𝑥 ))2  = E



> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

C𝑗, I (𝑥 ) · 𝑓 𝑗 (𝑥 )

!2

=

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

E

h C𝑗, I (𝑥 ) · 𝑓 𝑗 (𝑥 )2 i

+ 2 · 

> 𝑖 −1

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0
> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑘 =𝑗 +1

E C𝑗, I (𝑥 ) · 𝑓 𝑗 (𝑥 ) · C 𝑘, I (𝑥 ) · 𝑓 𝑘 (𝑥 )

=

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

(𝑓 𝑗 (𝑥 )) 2 · E C𝑗, I (𝑥 )

+ 2 · 

> 𝑖 −1

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0
> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑘 =𝑗 +1

𝑓 𝑗 (𝑥 ) · 𝑓 𝑘 (𝑥 ) · E C𝑗, I (𝑥 ) · C 𝑘, I (𝑥 ) . (1) Here, we have used the property (C𝑗, I (𝑥 )) 2 = C𝑗, I (𝑥 ) (which follows from C𝑗, I (𝑥 ) being an indicator random variable) to simplify the second line. To bound E C𝑗, I (𝑥 ), we use the definition of the epochs to conclude that E C𝑗, I (𝑥 ) ≤ 2𝑖 − 𝑗 /𝑊 𝑖 . For E C𝑗, I (𝑥 ) · C 𝑘, I (𝑥 ), we note that the product of the two indicator random variables is 1

only when both of them are 1. Yet, the two random variables are not independent: if C𝑘, I (𝑥 ) = 1 , then C𝑗, I (𝑥 ) = 1 for any 𝑘 ≥ 𝑗 .Namely, if during epoch 𝑘 , 𝑥 hashed into a counter whose address was a prefix of I’s address, then the same would have happened during epoch 𝑗 ≤ 𝑘 . This implies that C𝑗, I (𝑥 ) · C 𝑘, I (𝑥 ) = C𝑘, I (𝑥 ),thereby simplifying the sum to  

> 𝑖 −1

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0
> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑘 =𝑗 +1

𝑓 𝑗 (𝑥 ) · 𝑓 𝑘 (𝑥 )·E C𝑗, I (𝑥 ) · C 𝑘, I (𝑥 )

=

> 𝑖

∑︁  

> 𝑘 =1
> 𝑘 −1

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

𝑓 𝑗 (𝑥 ) · 𝑓 𝑘 (𝑥 ) · E C𝑘, I (𝑥 )

=

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑘 =1

𝑓 𝑘 (𝑥 ) · E C𝑘, I (𝑥 ) · 

> 𝑘 −1

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

𝑓 𝑗 (𝑥 )=

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑘 =1

𝑓 𝑘 (𝑥 ) · E C𝑘, I (𝑥 ) · 𝑓 ≤𝑘 −1(𝑥 ).

Here, for simplicity, we have denoted P𝑖 𝑗 =0 𝑓 𝑖 (𝑥 ), i.e., the sum of frequencies accumulated by 𝑥 through epochs 0 to 𝑖 , as 𝑓 ≤𝑖 (𝑥 ). Note that we set 𝑓 ≤− 1(𝑥 ) = 0 . Plugging the above into Equation (1) yields 

E (C (𝑥 ))2  =

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

 (𝑓 𝑗 (𝑥 )) 2 + 2 𝑓 𝑗 (𝑥 ) · 𝑓 ≤ 𝑗 −1(𝑥 ) · E C𝑗, I (𝑥 )

=

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

 (𝑓 ≤ 𝑗 (𝑥 ) + 𝑓 ≤ 𝑗 −1(𝑥 )) 2 − (𝑓 ≤ 𝑗 −1(𝑥 )) 2  · E C𝑗, I (𝑥 ) .

=

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

 (𝑓 ≤ 𝑗 (𝑥 )) 2 − (𝑓 ≤ 𝑗 −1(𝑥 )) 2  · E C𝑗, I (𝑥 ) .

While the term 𝑓 ≤ 𝑗 (𝑥 )2 − 𝑓 ≤ 𝑗 −1(𝑥 )2 might seem curious, we note that P𝑥 𝑓 ≤ 𝑗 (𝑥 )2 − 𝑓 ≤ 𝑗 −1(𝑥 )2 = 𝐹 𝑗 +1 − 𝐹 𝑗 denotes the increase in the squared ℓ2-norm of the stream vector as we move from epoch 𝑗 to epoch 𝑗 + 1 .Putting everything together, we get that 

Var 

 ˆ𝑓 (𝑧 )



=∑︁ 𝑥 

E (C (𝑥 ))2  − (𝑓 (𝑧 )) 2

=∑︁ 𝑥 𝑖 ∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

 (𝑓 ≤ 𝑗 (𝑥 )) 2 − (𝑓 ≤ 𝑗 −1(𝑥 )) 2  · E C𝑗, I (𝑥 ) − (𝑓 (𝑧 )) 2

≤

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

 𝐹 𝑗 +1 − 𝐹 𝑗 

 · 2𝑖 − 𝑗 

𝑊 𝑖 

,

proving the claim. □

At this point, the reasoning behind defining the size function to based on the squared ℓ2-norm of the stream becomes more clear. We now apply Lemma B.2 to derive bounds on the variance depending on the size function: 

Theorem 4.2. When using a size function 𝑊 (·) and a single array on a stream with a squared ℓ2-norm of 𝐹 = P𝑦 𝑓 (𝑦 )2, Sublime CS 

provides unbiased estimates with a variance 𝑉 (𝐹 ) satisfying 

𝑉 (𝐹 ) ≤

(

𝑂 (1) · 𝜖𝐹 1−𝛼 if 𝑊 (𝐹 ) = 𝐹 𝛼 /𝜖 , for 𝛼 ∈ [0 , 1) ,

log 2 𝐹 · 𝜖 if 𝑊 (𝐹 ) = 𝐹 /𝜖 .Compared to a fixed-size CS allocated upfront with an array of 𝑊 (𝑁 )

counters with knowledge of 𝐹 , the variance terms above are higher by at most a constant and a logarithmic 20 factor. 

> 20

This logarithmic term can be bounded in terms of the total key count 𝑁 , as 𝐹 ≤ 𝑁 2

and thus log 2 𝐹 ≤ 2 · log 2 𝑁 .Accepted to SIGMOD 2026 

SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India Navid Eslami, Ioana O. Bercea, Rasmus Pagh, and Niv Dayan 

We note that the calculations for proving Theorem 4.2 are very similar to those carried out for Sublime CMS in Theorem 4.1, with the difference that we now see a dependency on the squared ℓ2-norm 𝐹 

rather than the total key count 𝑁 . We include these derivations for completeness: 

Proof. We start with the original sketch S0, which is used to pro-cess the stream until its squared ℓ2-norm reaches at most some 𝐹 0.

The Linear Case of 𝑊 (𝐹 ) = 𝐹 /𝜖 . In this case, the size function doubles whenever the squared ℓ2-norm doubles, i.e., 𝐹 𝑗 +1 = 2 · 𝐹 𝑗 

for all 𝑗 ≥ 0 and, in general, 𝐹 𝑗 = 2 𝑗 · 𝐹 0 for all 𝑗 ≥ 0. We therefore get that 

𝑉 (𝐹 ) ≤

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

 𝐹 𝑗 +1 − 𝐹 𝑗 

 · 2𝑖 − 𝑗 

𝑊 𝑖 

≤ 1

𝑊 𝑖 

· 𝐹 0 · 2𝑖 +

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

 2𝑗 +1 − 2𝑗  · 𝐹 0 · 2𝑖 − 𝑗 

!

≤ 1

𝑊 𝑖 

· 𝐹 0 · 2𝑖 +

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

2𝑗 · 𝐹 0 · 2𝑖 − 𝑗 

!

≤ 1

𝑊 𝑖 

· 𝐹 0 · 2𝑖 +

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝐹 0 · 2𝑖 

!

≤ (𝑖 + 1) · 𝐹 𝑖 

𝑊 𝑖 

.

The Sublinear Case of 𝑊 (𝐹 ) = 𝐹 𝛼 /𝜖 . In this case, the size function doubles more slowly, i.e., whenever 𝐹 𝑖 +1 = 2 1/𝛼 · 𝐹 𝑖 . Since 0 ≤

𝛼 < 1, 𝐹 𝑖 +1 is bigger than 2𝐹 𝑖 . Plugging this into the statement of Lemma B.2, we have that 𝐹 𝑖 = 2 𝑖 /(1 −𝛼 ) · 𝐹 0 and thus 

1

𝑊 𝑖 

·

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

2𝑖 − 𝑗 ·(𝐹 𝑗 +1 − 𝐹 𝑗 )= 1

𝑊 𝑖 

·

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

2𝑖 − 𝑗 ·



2(𝑗 +1) /(1 −𝛼 ) · 𝐹 0 − 2𝑗 /(1 −𝛼 ) · 𝐹 0



= 1

𝑊 𝑖 

·

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

2𝑖 − 𝑗 · 2𝑗 /(1 −𝛼 ) · 𝐹 0 ·



21/(1 −𝛼 ) − 1



= 1

𝑊 𝑖 

· 2𝑖 · 𝐹 0 ·



21/(1 −𝛼 ) − 1



·

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

2𝑗 /(1 −𝛼 )− 𝑗 

= 𝑂 (𝐹 𝑖 +1 /𝑊 𝑖 ).

□

B.3 Upper Bounds for Sublime MG 

In the case of Sublime MG , we consider a slightly more general division of time into epochs. We start with a sketch that uses 𝑊 (𝑁 0)

counters until the stream length reaches 𝑁 0. At this point in time, the sketch sets the number of counters to 𝑊 (𝑁 1). We leave the relationship between 𝑊 (𝑁 0) and 𝑊 (𝑁 1) undefined for now. The sketch uses 𝑊 (𝑁 1) counters until the stream length reaches 𝑁 1, and we call this period of time epoch 1. Once 𝑁 2 is reached, the sketch switches to 𝑊 (𝑁 2) counters (starting epoch 2) and so on. We then prove the following lemma: 

Lemma B.3. Letting 𝐸 (𝑁 ) denote the estimation error of Sublime MG 

when using a size function 𝑊 (·) on a stream with a total of 𝑁 keys, we have at the end of epoch 𝑖 that 

𝐸 (𝑁 𝑖 ) ≤

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

𝑁 𝑗 − 𝑁 𝑗 −1

𝑊 (𝑁 𝑗 ) + 1 ,

where 𝑁 𝑗 for 𝑗 ≥ 0 denotes the total number of keys in the stream at the end of epoch 𝑗 .

Proof. We begin by first defining some notation. Let 𝐶 𝑖 denote the sum of the counter stored in the sketch at the end of epoch 𝑖 

(with 𝐶 −1 = 0 ). Note that 𝐶 𝑖 ≥ 0, since we only decrement counters when they are all nonzero. We also denote by 𝑑 𝑖 the total number of keys that decrement the sketch’s counts during epoch 𝑖 . By design, the following relationship holds for each 𝑖 ≥ 1:

𝐶 𝑖 = 𝐶 𝑖 −1 + 𝑁 𝑖 − 𝑁 𝑖 −1 − 𝑑 𝑖 · (𝑊 (𝑁 𝑖 ) + 1) .

To see why this is true, consider the case in which 𝑖 = 1 . At the beginning of the first epoch, the counts stored in the sketch add up to 𝐶 0. During the epoch, we see 𝑁 1 − 𝑁 0 fresh insertions, each of which either increases the total count of the sketch by 1, or decrements 𝑊 (𝑁 1) counts. The number of keys among these 𝑁 1 −𝑁 0

that make such decrements is exactly 𝑑 1. In other words, there are 𝑁 1 − 𝑁 0 − 𝑑 1 keys that increase the sketch counts by 1, and 𝑑 1

keys that decrease the sketch count by 𝑊 (𝑁 1). The total changes are therefore 𝑁 1 − 𝑁 0 − 𝑑 1 − 𝑑 1 · 𝑊 (𝑁 1), which is how we get the first expression. It follows from the general expression that 

𝑑 𝑖 = 𝑁 𝑖 − 𝑁 𝑖 −1 + 𝐶 𝑖 − 𝐶 𝑖 −1

𝑊 (𝑁 𝑖 ) + 1 .

Now, for any specific key 𝑥 , the maximum error that we can make in its count is if we decrement its count every time we a key decrements the sketch’s counts (i.e., this worst-case is achieved when the sketch stores all occurences of 𝑥 from the beginning and then keeps decrementing one from its count every time it seems an unstored key). Formally, if we are at the end of epoch 𝑖 , then the error is bounded as 

𝐸 (𝑁 𝑖 ) ≤ 𝑓 (𝑥 ) − ˆ𝑓 (𝑥 ) ≤

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

𝑑 𝑗 .

Plugging in our expression for 𝑑 𝑗 and using 𝑊 𝑗 = 𝑊 (𝑁 𝑗 ) for ease of notation yields 

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

𝑑 𝑗 =

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

𝑁 𝑗 − 𝑁 𝑗 −1 + 𝐶 𝑗 −1 − 𝐶 𝑗 

𝑊 𝑗 + 1 =

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

𝑁 𝑗 − 𝑁 𝑗 −1

𝑊 𝑗 + 1 +

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

𝐶 𝑗 −1 − 𝐶 𝑗 

𝑊 𝑗 + 1 =

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

𝑁 𝑗 − 𝑁 𝑗 −1

𝑊 𝑗 + 1 + 

> 𝑖 −1

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

𝐶 𝑗 ·



− 1

𝑊 𝑗 + 1 + 1

𝑊 𝑗 +1 + 1 



− 𝐶 𝑖 

𝑊 𝑗 + 1 =

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

𝑁 𝑗 − 𝑁 𝑗 −1

𝑊 𝑗 + 1 − 

> 𝑖 −1

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

𝐶 𝑗 · 𝑊 𝑗 +1 − 𝑊 𝑗 

(𝑊 𝑗 + 1)( 𝑊 𝑗 +1 + 1) − 𝐶 𝑖 

𝑊 𝑖 + 1 

≤

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

𝑁 𝑗 − 𝑁 𝑗 −1

𝑊 𝑗 + 1 ,

where the last inequality holds because 𝑊 𝑗 +1 > 𝑊 𝑗 , so we are ignoring negative factors in the sum. □

In addition to Lemma B.3, we require the following technical claim to prove Theorem A.1: Accepted to SIGMOD 2026 

Sublime: Sublinear Error & Space for Unbounded Skewed Streams SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India 

Claim B.4. For any constant 𝛼 < 1, it holds that 

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

2𝑗 /𝛼 − 2(𝑗 −1) /𝛼 

2𝑗 = 𝑂 (1) · 2𝑖 /𝛼 

2𝑖 .

Proof. We note that 

2𝑗 /𝛼 − 2(𝑗 −1) /𝛼 

2𝑗 = (1 − 2−1/𝛼 ) · 2𝑗 /𝛼 

2𝑗 

= (1 − 2−1/𝛼 ) · 2𝑖 /𝛼 

2𝑖 · 2(𝑗 −𝑖 )/𝛼 

2𝑗 −𝑖 

= (1 − 2−1/𝛼 ) · 12(𝑖 − 𝑗 )·(1 /𝛼 −1) · 2𝑖 /𝛼 

2𝑖 .

Summing these terms yields 

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

2𝑗 /𝛼 − 2(𝑗 −1) /𝛼 

2𝑗 ≤ (1 − 2−1/𝛼 ) · 2𝑖 /𝛼 

2𝑖 ·

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

12(𝑖 − 𝑗 )·(1 /𝛼 −1) 

= 𝑂 (1) · 2𝑖 /𝛼 

2𝑖 ,

since 1/𝛼 ≥ 1 and the sum P𝑖 𝑗 =0 12(𝑖 − 𝑗 )·(1 /𝛼 −1) converges to a constant. 

□

We are now ready to prove Theorem A.1: 

Theorem A.1. When using a size function 𝑊 (·) on a stream with a total key count of 𝑁 , Sublime MG provides an estimation error 𝐸 (𝑁 )

satisfying 

𝐸 (𝑁 ) ≤

(

𝑂 (1) · 𝜖𝑁 1−𝛼 if 𝑊 (𝑁 ) = 𝑁 𝛼 /𝜖 , for 𝛼 ∈ [0 , 1) ,

ln 𝑁 · 𝜖 if 𝑊 (𝑁 ) = 𝑁 /𝜖 .Compared to a fixed-size MG allocated upfront with an array of 𝑊 (𝑁 )

counters with knowledge of 𝑁 , the error terms above are higher by at most a constant and a logarithmic factor. 

Proof. 

The Linear Case of 𝑊 (𝑁 ) = 𝑁 /𝜖 . In this case, we use the fact that in Sublime MG we increase the counters one by one as opposed to doubling them. In other words, we consider divisions into epochs for which 𝑊 (𝑁 𝑖 +1 ) = 𝑊 (𝑁 𝑖 ) + 1 and hence 𝑁 𝑖 +1 = 𝑁 𝑖 + 𝜖 . Plugging this into Lemma B.3, we get at the end of epoch 𝑖 that 

𝐸 (𝑁 𝑖 ) ≤

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

𝑁 𝑗 − 𝑁 𝑗 −1

𝑊 (𝑁 𝑗 ) + 1 = 𝑁 0

𝑊 (𝑁 0) +

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

𝜖 𝑊 (𝑁 0) + 𝑗 

= 𝜖 + 𝜖 ·

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =1

1

𝑊 (𝑁 0) + 𝑗 ≤ 𝜖 + 𝜖 ·

Z𝑊 (𝑁 0)+ 𝑖 𝑊 (𝑁 0)+1 

1

𝑥 𝑑𝑥 

≤ 𝜖 + 𝜖 · ln 

 𝑊 (𝑁 0) + 𝑖 𝑊 (𝑁 0) + 1 



≤ 𝜖 · (1 + ln 𝑖 ) ≤ 𝜖 · ln 𝑁 . 

Here, the last line follows from 𝑖 being the number of times we ex-pand by one counter until we reach a stream length of 𝑁 , implying that 𝑖 ≤ 𝑁 /𝜖 + 1 .

The Sublinear Case of 𝑊 (𝑁 ) = 𝑁 𝛼 /𝜖 . In this case, it is easier to think of divisions into time in which we double the number of counters instead of increasing them one by one. That is, we define the epochs such that 𝑊 (𝑁 𝑖 +1 ) = 2 ·𝑊 (𝑁 𝑖 ) and hence 𝑁 𝑖 +1 = 2 1/𝛼 · 𝑁 𝑖 .Noting that Lemma B.3 holds irrespective of the specific definition of the epochs then yields 

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

𝑁 𝑗 − 𝑁 𝑗 −1

𝑊 (𝑁 𝑗 ) + 1 =

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

2𝑗 /𝛼 · 𝑁 0 − 2(𝑗 −1) /𝛼 · 𝑁 0

2𝑗 · 𝑊 (𝑁 0)=

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

2𝑗 /𝛼 − 2(𝑗 −1) /𝛼 

2𝑗 · 𝑁 0

𝑊 (𝑁 0) .

Finally, by applying Claim B.4, we get 

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

𝑁 𝑗 − 𝑁 𝑗 −1

𝑊 (𝑁 𝑗 ) + 1 ≤ 𝑂 (1) · 2𝑖 /𝛼 

2𝑖 · 𝑁 0

𝑊 (𝑁 0) = 𝑂 (1) · 𝑁 𝑖 

𝑊 (𝑁 𝑖 ) .

proving the desired result. □

B.4 Tail Bounds for Sublime MG 

We prove the tail error guarantees for Sublime MG following the same general argument structure of Section B.3. 

Lemma B.5. Letting 𝐸 (𝑁 ) denote the error of Sublime MG when using a size function 𝑊 (·) on a stream of total of 𝑁 keys, we have at the end of epoch 𝑖 that 

𝐸 (𝑁 𝑖 ) ≤

> 𝑖

∑︁ 

> 𝑗 =0

𝑁 res (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑗

− 𝑁 res (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑗 −1

𝑊 (𝑁 𝑗 ) + 1 − 𝑘 ,

where 𝑁 res (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑗

for 𝑗 ≥ 0 is the total count of the keys not among the top 𝑘 at the end of epoch 𝑗 .

Proof. We start similarly as in the proof of Lemma B.3 and get that, if 𝑑 𝑖 is the number of deletions to the sketch that occur during some epoch 𝑖 ≥ 0, then it holds that 

𝐶 𝑖 = 𝐶 𝑖 −1 + 𝑁 𝑖 − 𝑁 𝑖 −1 − 𝑑 𝑖 · (𝑊 (𝑁 𝑖 ) + 1) .

Here, 𝐶 𝑖 denotes the sum of the sketch’s at the end of epoch 𝑖 (with 

𝐶 −1 = 0 ). We generalize the above to 

𝐶 𝑖 − 𝐶 𝑖 −1 ≥ 𝑁 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

− 𝑁 (𝑘 )  

> 𝑖 −1

− 𝑑 𝑖 · 𝑘, 

where 𝑁 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

denotes total count of the top 𝑘 keys at the end of epoch 𝑖 

(the top 𝑘 with respect to the whole stream). In other words, the change in the sketch counts is at least the change in the sketch counts restricted to the top 𝑘 keys. This is because the total count restriced to these 𝑘 keys increases by 𝑁 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

−𝑁 (𝑘 )  

> 𝑖 −1

and each of these 𝑘 

keys gets its counter decremented at most 𝑑 𝑖 times. Combining the equation and the inequality above and rearranging, we get that 

𝑑 𝑖 ≤ 𝑁 𝑖 − 𝑁 𝑖 −1 − 𝑁 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

+ 𝑁 (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖 −1

𝑊 (𝑁 𝑖 ) + 1 − 𝑘 = 𝑁 res (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

− 𝑁 res (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖 −1

𝑊 (𝑁 𝑖 ) + 1 − 𝑘 .

Summing these terms proves the desired result. □

We now proceed to prove the full tail bound of Theorem A.2 following the same proof structure as that of Theorem A.1: 

Theorem A.2. When using a size function 𝑊 (·) on a stream with a total key count of 𝑁 , Sublime MG provides an estimation error 𝐸 (𝑁 )

satisfying 

𝐸 (𝑁 ) ≤

(

𝑂 (1) · 𝜖  𝑁 res (𝑘 ) 1−𝛼 + 𝑂 (𝑘 1/𝛼 −1) if 𝑊 (𝑁 ) = 𝑁 𝛼 /𝜖 

ln 𝑁 res (𝑘 ) · 𝜖 + log 2 𝑘 if 𝑊 (𝑁 ) = 𝑁 /𝜖 ,where 𝑁 𝑟𝑒𝑠 (𝑘 ) is the total count of the keys not among the top 𝑘 .Accepted to SIGMOD 2026 

SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India Navid Eslami, Ioana O. Bercea, Rasmus Pagh, and Niv Dayan 

Proof. Note that the additive terms in the bounds of Theo-rem A.2 come from the application of Theorem A.1 to the portion of the stream that must be “waited out” by Sublime MG to create the 𝑘 -th counter for the first time. We therefore focus on deriv-ing the remaining part of the error bound, which corresponds to the error resulting from processing the stream with an instance of Sublime MG initialized with at least 𝑘 counters. 

The Linear Case of 𝑊 (𝑁 ) = 𝑁 /𝜖 . In this case, 𝑊 (𝑁 𝑖 +1 ) = 

𝑊 (𝑁 𝑖 ) + 1 and 𝑁 𝑖 +1 = 𝑁 𝑖 + 𝜖 . We consider an epoch 𝑖 and define a series of integers 𝑖 ℓ as follows. We start by defining 𝑖 1 as the largest integer such that 

𝑖 1∑︁ 

𝑗 =1 



𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑗 − 𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑗 −1



≤ 𝜖. 

In words, we group consecutive terms of the form 𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑗 − 𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑗 −1

until we are about to reach 𝜖 . Note that 

𝑖 1+1 ∑︁ 

𝑗 =1 



𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑗 − 𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑗 −1



≥ 𝜖, 

as the maximality of 𝑖 1 implies that the extra term 𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑖 1+1 − 𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑖 1

causes the sum to grow beyond 𝜖 . We also define 𝑖 2 > 𝑖 1 in a similar fashion as the largest index such that 

𝑖 2∑︁ 

𝑗 =𝑖 1+1 



𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑗 − 𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑗 −1



≤ 𝜖. 

Like before, we stop right before we gather a sum of 𝜖 . Moreover, as before, including the extra term 𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑖 2+1 − 𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑖 2 yields 

𝑖 2+1 ∑︁ 

𝑗 =𝑖 1+1 



𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑗 − 𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑗 −1



≥ 𝜖. 

We continue as such for ℓ steps until we have that: 

𝑖 ∑︁ 

𝑗 =𝑖 ℓ +1 



𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑗 − 𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑗 −1



≤ 𝜖. 

We now define 𝑖 0 = 0 and upper bound ℓ as 

𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑖 ≥

𝑖 ℓ∑︁ 

𝑗 =1 



𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑗 − 𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑗 −1



≥ 12 ·

ℓ∑︁ 

𝑠 =0 

𝑖 𝑠 +1 +1 ∑︁ 

𝑗 =𝑖 𝑠 +1 



𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑗 − 𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑗 −1



≥ 12 ·

ℓ∑︁ 

𝑠 =0 

𝜖 = 𝜖 · ℓ/2,

i.e., ℓ ≤ 2𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑖 /𝜖 . Now we also observe that for every 0 ≤ 𝑠 ≤ ℓ it holds that 

𝑖 𝑠 +1 ∑︁ 

𝑗 =𝑖 𝑠 +1 

𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑗 − 𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑗 −1

𝑊 (𝑁 𝑗 ) + 1 − 𝑘 ≤

𝑖 𝑠 +1 ∑︁ 

𝑗 =𝑖 𝑠 +1 

𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑗 − 𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑗 −1

𝑊 (𝑁 0) + 𝑠 + 1 − 𝑘 

≤ 𝜖 𝑊 (𝑁 0) + 𝑠 + 1 − 𝑘 .

This is because 𝑊 (𝑁 𝑗 ) + 1 −𝑘 = 𝑊 (𝑁 0) + 𝑗 + 1 −𝑘 ≥ 𝑊 (𝑁 0) + 𝑠 + 1 −𝑘 ,since 𝑗 ≥ 𝑖 𝑠 + 1 by the bounds of the summation and 𝑖 𝑠 + 1 ≥ 𝑠 by the way we parametrize the 𝑖 𝑠 while defining them. Putting everything together yields 

𝑖 ∑︁ 

𝑗 =0 

𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑗 − 𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑗 −1

𝑊 (𝑁 𝑗 ) + 1 − 𝑘 ≤ 𝑁 res (𝑘 )0

𝑊 (𝑁 0) + 1 − 𝑘 +

ℓ∑︁ 

𝑠 =0 

𝜖 𝑊 (𝑁 0) + 𝑠 + 1 − 𝑘 

≤ 𝜖 + 𝜖 ·

ℓ∑︁ 

𝑠 =0 

1

𝑊 (𝑁 0) + 𝑠 + 1 − 𝑘 

≤ 𝜖 + 𝜖 ·

Z𝑊 (𝑁 0)+ ℓ+1 −𝑘 𝑊 (𝑁 0)+1 −𝑘 

1

𝑥 𝑑𝑥 

≤ 𝜖 + 𝜖 · ln ℓ ≤ 2𝜖 + 𝜖 · ln 𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑖 .

The Sublinear Case of 𝑊 (𝑁 ) = 𝑁 𝛼 /𝜖 . In this case, we switch to the notion of epochs where the number of counters doubles as opposed to increasing by one. That is, we define the epochs such that 𝑊 (𝑁 𝑖 +1 ) = 2 · 𝑊 (𝑁 𝑖 ) and hence 𝑁 𝑖 +1 = 2 1/𝛼 · 𝑁 𝑖 . We further define 𝛾 (𝑖 ) as the smallest integer such that 2𝛾 (𝑖 )/𝛼 · 𝑁 res (𝑘 )0 ≥ 𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑖 ,with 𝛾 (0) = 0 . It immediately follows that 

2𝛾 (𝑖 )/𝛼 · 𝑁 res (𝑘 )0 ≤ 21/𝛼 · 𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑖 .

We use 𝛾 (𝑖 ) to define a hypothetical upper bound on the error incurred if we were to double our counters as a function of 𝑁 res (𝑘 )

rather than 𝑁 , which is strictly worse for accuracy, yet creates a similar scenario to the proof of Theorem A.1 and yields the bounds Theorem A.2. We express this upper bound as 

𝐸 ′

𝑖 =

𝛾 (𝑖 )∑︁ 

ℓ=0 

2ℓ/𝛼 · 𝑁 res (𝑘 )0 − 2(ℓ −1) /𝛼 · 𝑁 res (𝑘 )0

2ℓ · 𝑊 



𝑁 res (𝑘 )0



− 𝑘 + 1 

.

We will relate the actual error of Sublime MG to 𝐸 ′ to prove the desired upper bound. To this end, we make the following claim that for all 𝑖 ≥ 0:

Claim B.6. 

𝑖 ∑︁ 

𝑗 =0 

𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑗 − 𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑗 −1

𝑊 (𝑁 𝑗 ) + 1 − 𝑘 ≤ 4 · 𝐸 ′

𝑖 .

Before we prove Claim B.6, we would first like to discuss in more detail how it implies our bounds. Namely, we first note that each denominator can be substituted by 2ℓ · 𝑊 



𝑁 res (𝑘 )0



. Then: 

𝐸 ′

𝑖 ≤

𝛾 (𝑖 )∑︁ 

ℓ=0 

2ℓ/𝛼 · 𝑁 res (𝑘 )0 − 2(ℓ −1) /𝛼 · 𝑁 res (𝑘 )0

2ℓ · 𝑊 



𝑁 res (𝑘 )0



=

𝛾 (𝑖 )∑︁ 

ℓ=0 

2ℓ/𝛼 − 2(ℓ −1) /𝛼 

2ℓ · 𝑁 res (𝑘 )0

𝑊 



𝑁 res (𝑘 )0



= 𝑂 (1) · 2𝛾 (𝑖 )/𝛼 · 𝑁 res (𝑘 )0

2𝛾 (𝑖 ) · 𝑊 



𝑁 res (𝑘 )0

 ,

where the last equality holds by Claim B.4. We now note that, by def-inition, the numerator is at most 21/𝛼 · 𝑁 res (𝑘 )

𝑖 , and the denominator Accepted to SIGMOD 2026 

Sublime: Sublinear Error & Space for Unbounded Skewed Streams SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India 

satisfies the following inequality: 

2𝛾 (𝑖 ) · 𝑊 



𝑁 res (𝑘 )0



=



2𝛾 (𝑖 )/𝛼 · 𝑁 res (𝑘 )0

𝛼 

/𝜖 

≥



𝑁 res (𝑘 )

> 𝑖

𝛼 

/𝜖 = 𝑊 



𝑁 res (𝑘 )

> 𝑖



.

Therefore, we have that 

𝐸 ′ 

> 𝑖

= 𝑂 (1) · 𝑁 res (𝑘 )

> 𝑖

𝑊 



𝑁 res (𝑘 )

> 𝑖

 .

In conjunction with Lemma B.5, we get the desired result. We now prove Claim B.6: 

Proof of Claim B.6. For 𝑖 = 0 , note that 𝛾 (0) = 0 and so: 

𝑁 res (𝑘 )0

𝑊 (𝑁 0) + 1 − 𝑘 = 𝐸 ′

> 0

For every 𝑖 ≥ 1, we prove that 

𝑁 res (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

− 𝑁 res (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖 −1

𝑊 (𝑁 𝑖 ) + 1 − 𝑘 ≤ 2 ·

> 𝛾 (𝑖 )

∑︁  

> ℓ=𝛾 (𝑖 −1)

2ℓ/𝛼 · 𝑁 res (𝑘 )0 − 2(ℓ −1) /𝛼 · 𝑁 res (𝑘 )0

2ℓ · 𝑊 



𝑁 res (𝑘 )0



− 𝑘 + 1 

.

To this end, we first upper bound the denominators on the right-hand side as 

2𝛾 (𝑖 ) · 𝑊 



𝑁 res (𝑘 )0



− 𝑘 + 1 ≤ 2 · ( 𝑊 (𝑁 𝑖 ) + 1 − 𝑘 ) .

This is because: 

2𝛾 (𝑖 ) · 𝑊 



𝑁 res (𝑘 )0



= 2 𝛾 (𝑖 ) ·



𝑁 res (𝑘 )0

𝛼 

/𝜖 =



2𝛾 (𝑖 )/𝛼 · 𝑁 res (𝑘 )0

𝛼 

/𝜖 

≤



21/𝛼 · 𝑁 res (𝑘 )

> 𝑖

𝛼 

/𝜖 

≤



21/𝛼 · 𝑁 𝑖 

𝛼 

/𝜖 = 2 · 𝑊 (𝑁 𝑖 ).

For the numerators of the right-hand side, we observe that 

> 𝛾 (𝑖 )

∑︁  

> ℓ=𝛾 (𝑖 −1)

2ℓ/𝛼 − 2(ℓ −1) /𝛼 =



2𝛾 (𝑖 )/𝛼 − 2(𝛾 (𝑖 −1) −1) /𝛼 

.

Since, by the definition of 𝛾 (𝑖 ), we have that 2𝛾 (𝑖 )/𝛼 · 𝑁 res (𝑘 )0 ≤

21/𝛼 · 𝑁 res (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

and 2(𝛾 (𝑖 −1) −1) /𝛼 · 𝑁 res (𝑘 )0 ≥ 𝑁 res (𝑘 )  

> 𝑖 −1

, the numerators must satisfy: 

> 𝛾 (𝑖 )

∑︁  

> ℓ=𝛾 (𝑖 −1)



2ℓ/𝛼 · 𝑁 res (𝑘 )0 − 2(ℓ −1) /𝛼 · 𝑁 res (𝑘 )0



≥ 𝑁 res (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

− 𝑁 res (𝑘 )  

> 𝑖 −1

.

Putting everything together yields 

𝑁 res (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖

− 𝑁 res (𝑘 ) 

> 𝑖 −1

𝑊 (𝑁 𝑖 ) + 1 − 𝑘 ≤

> 𝛾 (𝑖 )

∑︁  

> ℓ=𝛾 (𝑖 −1)

2ℓ/𝛼 · 𝑁 res (𝑘 )0 − 2(ℓ −1) /𝛼 · 𝑁 res (𝑘 )0

𝑊 (𝑁 𝑖 ) + 1 − 𝑘 

≤ 2 ·

> 𝛾 (𝑖 )

∑︁  

> ℓ=𝛾 (𝑖 −1)

2ℓ/𝛼 · 𝑁 res (𝑘 )0 − 2(ℓ −1) /𝛼 · 𝑁 res (𝑘 )0

2ℓ · 𝑊 



𝑁 res (𝑘 )0



− 𝑘 + 1 

,

which is what we wanted to prove for every specific epoch 𝑖 . Sum-ming these terms over all epochs and taking the double-counted terms into account then proves the claim. □

As such, the theorem follows. □

C LOWER BOUND: PROOF OF THEOREM 5.4 

Theorem 5.4. Consider a frequency estimation sketch providing estimates with an expected absolute error of 𝐸 (𝑁 ) and a variance of 𝛿 · (𝐸 (𝑁 )) 2 for any key when processing a stream of size 𝑁 . Such a sketch must use at least 𝑁 /𝐸 (𝑁 )·[Ω( log 1/𝛿 + log log (𝑁 /𝐸 (𝑁 ))) −Θ(1)] 

bits of memory at some point in time while processing a stream. 

Proof. Our proof follows a contradiction argument similar to the proof of Theorem 3.1 in [58]. That is, we consider a frequency estimation sketch S that, given a key 𝑥 , computes an estimate ˆ𝑓 (𝑥 )

such that |E[ ˆ𝑓 (𝑥 )] − 𝑓 (𝑥 )|≤ 𝐸 (𝑁 ) and Var ( ˆ𝑓 (𝑥 )) ≤ 𝑉 (𝑁 ) = 𝛿 · (𝐸 (𝑁 )) 2.Note that, by Chebyshev’s inequality, this sketch guarantees an estimation error of 2𝐸 (𝑁 ) with a confidence of 1 − 𝛿 . We show that if such a sketch is “too space-efficient,” it can be used to compress many sequences of 𝑛 = 𝑁 /(2 𝐸 (𝑁 )) keys x = 𝑥 1, . . . , 𝑥 𝑛 coming from a large universe 𝑈 of size 𝑢 ≫ 𝑛 to a size smaller than their entropy, which must be impossible. Our argument holds regardless of the time complexity of S’s operations. For simplicity, we prove this theorem assuming that E[ ˆ𝑓 (𝑥 )] = 𝑓 (𝑥 ), which corresponds to S having an estimation error of 𝐸 (𝑁 ) with a confidence of 1 − 𝛿 .Here, we compress sequences of 𝑛 = 𝑁 /𝐸 (𝑁 ) keys. This proof is generalizable to the full statement of the theorem. Consider the process of iterating through x’s keys. We parti-tion x into contiguous subsequences x1, x2, . . . , xℓ , with x𝑖 having a length of 2𝑖 · √𝑛 and ℓ = log 2 𝑛 /2. While iterating through these subsequences, we reinsert each key enough times into S such that by the time we are done with x1, . . . , x𝑖 for any 𝑖 , we have inserted each key a total 𝐸 (𝑁 𝑖 ) times, where 𝑁 𝑖 = 𝐸 (𝑁 𝑖 ) · P𝑖 𝑗 =1 |x𝑗 |. We denote the state of S after processing the subsequences x1, . . . , x𝑖 as S𝑖 . We denote S𝑖 ’s estimate for the count of key 𝑥 as ˆ𝑓 𝑖 (𝑥 ) while denoting the actual count of 𝑥 in x1, . . . , x𝑖 as 𝑓 𝑖 (𝑥 ).We first show that, the estimates of one of the S𝑖 s can be extended to an estimator that has a “small” second moment of at most 𝑉 /ℓ =2 ·𝑉 /log 2 𝑛 . We will use these estimates to compress the sequence x.To this end, we apply the law of total variance to get, for any key 𝑥 ,

Var 

 ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 )



= E

h

Var 

 ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) ˆ𝑓 ℓ −1(𝑥 )

i 

+ Var 



E

h ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) ˆ𝑓 ℓ −1(𝑥 )

i  

.

Applying the law of total variance once more to the right summand simplifies it to 

Var 



E

h ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) ˆ𝑓 ℓ −1(𝑥 )

i  

= E

h

Var 



E

h ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) ˆ𝑓 ℓ −1(𝑥 )

i ˆ𝑓 ℓ −2(𝑥 )

i 

+ Var 



E

h

E

h ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) ˆ𝑓 ℓ −1(𝑥 )

i ˆ𝑓 ℓ −2(𝑥 )

i  

= E

h

Var 



E

h ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) ˆ𝑓 ℓ −1(𝑥 )

i ˆ𝑓 ℓ −2(𝑥 )

i 

+ Var 



E

h ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) ˆ𝑓 ℓ −2(𝑥 )

i  

.

Here, we have simplified the inner expectation in the second sum-mand using the law of total expectation. Recursively applying the law of total variance this term yields, for any 𝑖 , that 

Var 



E

h ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) ˆ𝑓 𝑖 (𝑥 )

i  

= E

h

Var 



E

h ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) ˆ𝑓 𝑖 (𝑥 )

i ˆ𝑓 𝑖 −1(𝑥 )

i 

+ Var 



E

h ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) ˆ𝑓 𝑖 −1(𝑥 )

i  

,

with Var 



E

h ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) ˆ𝑓 0(𝑥 )

i  

= 0 due to ˆ𝑓 0(𝑥 ) and thus E

h ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) ˆ𝑓 0(𝑥 )

i

being constants. Now, we utilize the definition of the variance to Accepted to SIGMOD 2026  

> SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India Navid Eslami, Ioana O. Bercea, Rasmus Pagh, and Niv Dayan

simplify the expectations of the variances as 

E

h

Var 



E

h ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) ˆ𝑓 𝑖 (𝑥 )

i ˆ𝑓 𝑖 −1(𝑥 )

i 

= E



E



E

h ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) ˆ𝑓 𝑖 (𝑥 )

i

− E

h

E

h ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) ˆ𝑓 𝑖 (𝑥 )

i i  2 ˆ𝑓 𝑖 −1(𝑥 )

  

= E



E

h ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) ˆ𝑓 𝑖 (𝑥 )

i

− E

h

E

h ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) ˆ𝑓 𝑖 (𝑥 )

i i  2 

= E



E

h ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) ˆ𝑓 𝑖 (𝑥 )

i

− E

h ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 )

i  2 

= E



E

h ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) ˆ𝑓 𝑖 (𝑥 )

i

− 𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 )

2 

= ˆ 𝑒 𝑖 (𝑥 ).

The third and fourth lines apply the law of total expectation to simplify the double expectations, and the fifth line utilizes the assumption of E[ ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 )] = 𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ). Intuitively, ˆ𝑒 𝑖 (𝑥 ) is a measure of how much the conditional frequency estimate E

h ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) ˆ𝑓 𝑖 (𝑥 )

i

can deviate from 𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ). Summing these terms yields 

𝑉 (𝑁 ) ≥ Var 

 ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 )



= Var 



E

h ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) ˆ𝑓 ℓ −1(𝑥 )

i  

+ 

> ℓ−1

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

ˆ𝑒 𝑖 (𝑥 )=

> ℓ

∑︁ 

> 𝑖 =1

ˆ𝑒 𝑖 (𝑥 ). (2) Here we have simplified the term Var 



E

h ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) ˆ𝑓 ℓ −1(𝑥 )

i  

to ˆ𝑒 ℓ by expressing ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) as E

h ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 )

i

and simplifying similarly to the other terms. Equation (2) implies that, for at least half of the 𝑖 s, it holds that 

ˆ𝑒 𝑖 ∗ (𝑥 ) ≤ 2 · 𝑉 (𝑁 )/ℓ. By an averaging argument, this further implies that there is some 𝑖 ∗ such that ˆ𝑒 𝑖 ∗ (𝑥 ) ≤ 2 · 𝑉 (𝑁 )/ℓ holds for at least half of the elements 𝑥 from the universe 𝑈 , which we denote by 𝑈 ′

with |𝑈 ′ |= 𝑢 ′ ≥ 𝑢 /2 ≫ 𝑛 .We now focus on sequences x consisting of the elements of 𝑈 ′.We leverage the property of low ˆ𝑒 𝑖 ∗ (𝑥 ) to compress the subse-quence x𝑖 . Our encoding proceeds as follows: (i) We write the explicit representations of the keys in all sub-sequences x𝑖 , where 𝑖 > 𝑖 ∗. The total cost for writing these representations is (𝑛 − P𝑖 ∗ 

> 𝑗 =1

|x𝑗 |) · log 2 𝑢 ′ bits. (ii) We write the state of the sketch S𝑖 ∗ . This takes |S 𝑖 ∗ | bits, which is the quantity we want to bound. Since we know the sequences x𝑖 ∗+1 , . . . , xℓ and the state of the sketch S𝑖 ∗ , and because we do not limit the running time, we can compute 𝑔 (𝑥 ) = E

h ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) ˆ𝑓 𝑖 ∗ (𝑥 )

i

by setting the remaining randomness of S𝑖 ∗ to all possible combinations, processing x𝑖 ∗+1 , . . . , xℓ , and averaging the estimates ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ).Note that here we are assuming that S is a linear sketch, which allows us to scale its state to increase the counts of the keys in x1, . . . , x𝑖 ∗ to the count of 𝐸 (𝑁 ) of the entire stream without scanning them. Recall that 

2 · 𝑉 (𝑁 )/ℓ ≥ ˆ𝑒 𝑖 ∗ (𝑥 ) = E



E

h ˆ𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ) ˆ𝑓 𝑖 ∗ (𝑥 )

i

− 𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 )

2 

.

This implies that the estimate 𝑔 (𝑥 ) is unlikely to deviate more than 𝐸 (𝑁 ) from 𝑓 ℓ (𝑥 ). That is, when 𝑔 (𝑥 )/𝐸 (𝑁 ) is smaller than the number of times 𝑥 appears in x outside of x1, . . . , x𝑖 ∗ by more than 1/2, 𝑥 most probably does not appear in x1, . . . , x𝑖 ∗ .This allows for reducing the number of bits required to en-code each element in x1, . . . , x𝑖 ∗ in our compression scheme. (iii) Yet, since 𝑔 (𝑥 ) can suffer from severe underestimations, one cannot rely purely on its value to compress and decom-press the subsequences x1, . . . , x𝑖 ∗ . To address this issue, we store a bit for each key in x1, . . . , x𝑖 ∗ indicating whether 𝑔 (𝑥 )

underestimates its count by in the entire stream by more than 𝐸 (𝑁 )/2. Each bit is 1 if the corresponding key has a large underestimation error, and 0 otherwise. This takes a total of P𝑖 ∗ 

> 𝑗 =1

|x𝑗 |= (2 𝑖 ∗+1 − 1) · √𝑛 bits. (iv) For each bit set to 1 in the previous step, we store the exact representation of the corresponding key using log 2 𝑢 ′ bits. All keys in x1, . . . , x𝑖 ∗ associated with a 0 bit either have over-estimation errors or an absolute error smaller than 𝐸 (𝑁 )/2.As such, they only need to be disambiguated from the set of keys 𝑥 where 𝑔 (𝑥 ) ≥ 𝐸 (𝑁 )/2.(v) For each bit set to 0 in the third step, we store the index of the corresponding key in x𝑖 ∗ from the set of all keys 𝑦 where 

𝑔 (𝑦 )/𝐸 (𝑁 ) is larger than the number of times 𝑦 appears in the rest of the sequence by at least 1/2. The cost per each key is the logarithm of the size of this set. We now fix the internal randomness of S𝑖 ∗ to convert it to a deterministic sketch giving rise to a 𝑔 (·) that, for many sequences x,only has estimation errors larger than 𝐸 (𝑁 )/2 on a 64 𝛿 /log 2 𝑛 frac-tion of the elements in 𝑈 ′. We denote the fraction of such keys for a given sequence x as 𝜇 (x). Notice how 𝜇 (x) is relative size of the set we use to encode each key in the fifth step of the encoding. We also show that one can pick the internal randomness such that, in addition the aforementioned condition, 𝑔 (·) errs more than 𝐸 (𝑁 )

on a fraction of at most 64 𝛿 /log 2 𝑛 of the keys in the special subse-quence x𝑖 ∗ . We denote this fraction by 𝜂 (x). Notice also how 𝜂 (x) is fraction of the bits set to 1 in the third step of the encoding, which dictates the number of keys we store explicitly in the fourth step. We prove the above statement following a similar argument to that of Section 3.1 in [58]: 

Lemma C.1. We can fix the internal randomness of the sketch S𝑖 ∗

such that, for at least half of the possible sequences x, i.e., 𝑢 ′𝑛 /2 many of them, 𝜇 (x) ≤ 64 𝛿 /log 2 𝑛 and 𝜂 (x) ≤ 64 𝛿 /log 2 𝑛 .

Proof. By Markov’s inequality, the 𝑔 (𝑥 ) resulting from the ran-domized version of S𝑖 ∗ has errors bounded by 𝐸 (𝑁 )/2 with a con-fidence of at least 1 − 8𝛿 /ℓ = 1 − 16 𝛿 /log 2 𝑛 for any 𝑥 ∈ 𝑈 ′ when processing the subsequence x𝑖 ∗ . Thus, denoting the internal random bits of S𝑖 ∗ by 𝑟 , for any x ∈ 𝑈 ′𝑛 , we have that E𝑟 [𝜇 (x)] ≤ 16 𝛿 /log 2 𝑛 

and E𝑟 [𝜂 (x)] ≤ 16 𝛿 /log 2 𝑛 . Therefore, once again by Markov’s in-equality, we have 

Pr 

> 𝑟

𝜇 (x) ≥ 64 𝛿 /log 2 𝑛  ≤ 14 , Pr 

> 𝑟

𝜂 (x) ≥ 64 𝛿 /log 2 𝑛  ≤ 14 .

Thus, by a union bound, we have that 

Pr 

> 𝑟

𝜇 (x) ≥ 64 𝛿 /log 2 𝑛 ∨ 𝜂 (x) ≥ 64 𝛿 /log 2 𝑛  ≤ 12 .

Taking the complement of the above yields 

Pr 

> 𝑟

𝜇 (x) < 64 𝛿 /log 2 𝑛 ∧ 𝜂 (x) < 64 𝛿 /log 2 𝑛  ≥ 12 .

That is, each x satisfies 𝜇 (x) < 64 𝛿 /log 2 𝑛 and 𝜂 (x) < 64 𝛿 /log 2 𝑛 

with a probability of at least 1/2. An averaging argument implies Accepted to SIGMOD 2026 

Sublime: Sublinear Error & Space for Unbounded Skewed Streams SIGMOD ’26, May 31–June 05, 2026, Bengaluru, India 

that there is some choice for the internal randomness of S𝑖 ∗ , i.e., 𝑟 ,that satisfies 𝜇 (x) < 64 𝛿 /log 2 𝑛 and 𝜂 (x) < 64 𝛿 /log 2 𝑛 at the same time for at least half of all 𝑢 ′𝑛 sequences. □

We thus fix the internal randomness of S𝑖 ∗ to the string indicated by Lemma C.1 and use the estimation function 𝑔 (·) that arises from it to encode the an arbitrary sequence from the 𝑢 ′𝑛 /2 sequences in Lemma C.1. The first, second, and third steps of the encoding take up (𝑛 − (2 𝑖 ∗+1 − 1) · √𝑛 ) · log 2 𝑢 ′, |S 𝑖 ∗ |, and (2 𝑖 ∗+1 − 1) · √𝑛 bits, respectively. Since we have 𝜂 (x) ≤ 64 𝛿 /log 2 𝑛 for all sequencees x

that we consider, the number of 1s we store in the bitmap in the third step is at most 64 𝛿 

log 2 𝑛 · (2 𝑖 ∗+1 −1) · √𝑛 bits. We explicitly store the keys that correspond to these bits in the fourth step, taking 64 𝛿 

log 2 𝑛 ·

(2 𝑖 ∗+1 − 1) · √𝑛 · log 2 𝑢 ′ bits. Finally, for the keys corresponding to the 0 bits in the bitmap from the third step, since 𝜇 (x) determines the size of the set we index in the last step, it takes 



1 − 64 𝛿 

log 2 𝑛 



· (2 𝑖 ∗+1 − 1) · √𝑛 · log 2 (𝜇 (x) · 𝑢 ′ )

=



1 − 64 𝛿 

log 2 𝑛 



· (2 𝑖 ∗+1 − 1) · √𝑛 ·



log 2 𝑢 ′ − log 2 log 2 𝑛 − log 2

1

𝛿 + 4 



bits to encode them. The sum of these costs cannot be smaller than the entropy of encoding a random sequence from these 𝑢 ′𝑛 /2

sequences, i.e., 𝑛 · log 2 𝑢 ′ − 1 bits. That is, summing up the costs of the encoding, the following inequality holds: 

|S 𝑖 ∗ |+𝑛 · log 2 𝑢 ′

+ (2 𝑖 ∗+1 − 1) · √𝑛 ·



1 −



1 − 64 𝛿 

log 2 𝑛 



·



log 2 log 2 𝑛 + log 2

1

𝛿 − 4

  

≥ 𝑛 · log 2 𝑢 ′ − 1.

Simplifying the above inequality, we get that |S 𝑖 ∗ | must be at least 

(2 𝑖 ∗+1 − 1) √𝑛 ·

 

1 − 64 𝛿 

log 2 𝑛 



·



log 2 log 2 𝑛 + log 2

1

𝛿 − 4



− 1



− 1,

which is equivalent to 

|S 𝑖 ∗ |≥ 

𝑖 ∗∑︁ 

𝑗 =1 

|x𝑗 |· 



log 2 log 2 𝑛 + log 2

1

𝛿 − Θ(1) 



,

for 𝑛 large enough or 𝛿 small enough. Letting 𝑛 ′ = P𝑖 ∗

𝑗 =1 |x𝑗 | and noting that log 2 log 2 𝑛 ≥ log 2 log 2 𝑛 ′, we have that 

|S 𝑖 ∗ |≥ 𝑛 ′ ·



log 2 log 2 𝑛 ′ + log 2

1

𝛿 − Θ(1) 



.

Finally, recalling that the stream processed by S𝑖 ∗ had a length of 𝑁 𝑖 ∗ = 𝑛 ′ · 𝐸 (𝑁 𝑖 ∗ ) and rewriting 𝑛 ′ as 𝑁 𝑖 ∗ /𝐸 (𝑁 𝑖 ∗ ) yields 

|S 𝑖 ∗ |≥ 𝑁 𝑖 ∗ /𝐸 (𝑁 𝑖 ∗ ) ·



log 2 log 2(𝑁 𝑖 ∗ /𝐸 (𝑁 𝑖 ∗ )) + log 2

1

𝛿 − Θ(1) 



,

which proves the desired result. □

Received 17 October 2025; revised 17 October 2025; accepted 17 October 2025